Languages:

  o     What programming languages do you know and how well
        do you know them.
  o	Have you done any assembler programming?
	  For which machine(s)?
  o	Do you prefer to program in assembler, or high-level languages?
  o	Have you ever seen BLISS?
  o	How do you like programming in C?
  o	How do you like programming in PASCAL?


DBMS:

  o	How much experience do you have with data-base concepts?
  o	Have you done any DBMS programming?
  o	What is Relational?


Operating Systems:

  o	Have you taken any OS internals classes?
	  How did you like it?
	  How did you do?
  o	Have you ever seen VMS?
  o	How much do you like UNIX?
  o	What other operating systems have you worked with?
  o	Which is your favorite?


Classes:

  o     What computer science courses are you taking this quarter?
  o	Which classes have been your favorites?
        Least favorite.  Why.
  o     Is there enough time to do programming work?
  o	Do you plan to do a senior thesis or a comprehensive?
	  If the former, what about, with whom?
  o	Have you done much independent-study work?
  o	Who is your advisor? How do you like him/her?
  o	Describe an outstanding project (enjoyable/challenging) you have
	  done.


Life in general:

  o	What level of documentation do you feel is necessary to be able
	  to maintain a given program. (In assembler? In high-level
	  languages?).
  o	What do you plan to do after you graduate?
	  What kind of job do you want to have?
  o	How well do you work in groups?
  o	How easily do you learn new programming concepts & ideas?
          Do you feel that a PASCAL programmer could easily
          move to C or another block structured language and visversa
  o	How well do you take instruction?
  o	How well do you give instruction?
  o	How well do you timeshare between a number of tasks?
  o     You have heard the discriptions of the positions that are open.
          Are you willing to do some amount of busywork (up to 50%)?

Further questions and What is next.

  o     Further questions?
  o     Are you still interested?
  o     Reminder of next week and signoff
