










                        Compiler Implementation Notes #3

                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs




     0.   Purpose

          This   document   describes   the   issues   surrounding   common
     subexpression  optimization,  and  proposes  feasible transformations.
     The primary concern is for safety.  The  interaction  between  certain
     optimizations and language features may cause some programs to execute
     incorrectly,  unless  adequate  defensive  steps  are  taken  by   the
     programmer.  Our  purpose  in  preparing  this document is to obtain a
     consensus on the proper balance  between  improvements  in  efficiency
     resulting  from  optimization,  and  risks  due  to  optimization side
     effects.  The reader is requested to consider carefully the impact  of
     these proposals, and to return any comments (preferably in writing) to
     the authors.  (Portions of the text containing specific proposals  are
     marked  with a vertical bar in the right margin.  There is also a list
     of specific issues at the end of the paper.)




     1.   Introduction

          Consider the Pascal assignment statement:

          x := a1 * (a+b)*(a+b) + a2 * (a+b) + a3;

     A simple application of common subexpression elimination would replace
     this with the pair of statements:

          temp := a + b;
          x := a1*temp*temp + a2*temp + a3;

     The application of any optimization requires certain assumptions about
     the program.  For example, the  optimization  illustrated  above  will
     work only if the a and b in each of the three sums "a+b" are the same.
     Of course, this is true if a and b are variables; but it  wouldn't  be
     true  if  a  or b was a function (with no parameters) which returned a
     new random number each time it was called.




                                     - 1 -






                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


          A Pascal program manipulates values  stored  in  a  memory.  This
     memory  comprises  a  set  of  storage locations, each containing some
     value.  In  this  discussion,  the  terms  storage  location,  storage
     element,  and variable will be used synonymously to refer to a portion
     of memory holding a value.  Note that storage  elements  are  not  the
     same  as  memory words, and that a single portion of memory may belong
     simultaneously to more than one storage element.  For example, on  the
     PDP-10 the storage element for a packed array of 72 boolean components
     will occupy two words, while these same two words  will  also  contain
     the  72 one-bit storage elements for the individual values.  Variables
     may be referenced or modified by statements  in  a  program.  The  may
     either  be  accessed  directly,  by  symbolic names, or indirectly, by
     pointers or some other access method which derives the location  of  a
     variable  from  the value of some expression.  In this discussion, the
     terms name,  variable  address,  and  storage  address  will  be  used
     synonymously  to  refer to any symbol or expression by which a storage
     location may be accessed.  A symbolic name is declared in the  program
     and  is  bound  to  a  unique  variable,  while  a computed name is an
     expression which, when evaluated, yields the location of  a  variable.
     For  example,  "foo" is a symbolic name, but "foo^" and "foo[i,j]" are
     computed names.

          Most optimization algorithms assume that when a program statement
     refers  to  or  modifies  a  variable,  the  compiler can deduce which
     variable is being referred to.  Symbolic names  obviously  present  no
     problem; and in fact, optimization algorithms are frequently presented
     in the context of some language for  which  only  symbolic  names  are
     allowed.  On  the  other hand, it is in general impossible to identify
     the variable which is referred  to  by  an  arbitrary  computed  name.
     Consider the example:

          a [i] := 2;
          a [j] := 3;
          b := a [i]:

     The  third statement could be replaced by "b := 2" -- unless i = j, in
     which case it should be  replaced  by  "b := 3".  In  the  absence  of
     information  as  to  the  values of of i and j, no optimization can be
     performed.

          There are  a  number  of  possible  strategies  for  coping  with
     problems of this sort.  Some of these are:

     Safety  First.  Under  the assumption that "Anything that a programmer
          can do, he will,"  we  can  assume  the  worst  whenever  we  are
          confronted   with   a   problem.   In  some  cases,  an  absolute
          safety-first  strategy  can  require  a  virtual  abandonment  of
          optimization.

     Plausible Assumptions.  One might plausibly argue that in a reasonably
          written program, certain situations simply  will  not  occur.  We
          might  then place a warning in the language manual ("Do not do X!
          If you do X, strange things may happen in your  program.  If  you


     CIN-#3
                                     - 2 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


          insist  on  doing  X,  refrain  from  using  the optimizer.") and
          proceed on the assumption that  situation  X  will  never  arise.
          This  raises  the  prospect  of having an optimizer which inserts
          subtle bugs into programs which  are,  according  to  the  strict
          language  definition,  perfectly legal.  On the other hand, there
          are situations in  which  the  worst-case  assumption  (that  the
          programmer  really  may  do  X)  is  monumentally unlikely, and a
          safety-first strategy would lead to  the  abandonment  of  highly
          productive  optimizations.  When  confronted  with  one  of these
          bizarre situations, the programmer can always explicitly  disable
          optimization.

     Extra-Lingual   Assertions.  The  severity  of  either  of  the  above
          strategies can be mitigated  by  providing  a  facility  for  the
          ambitious  programmer  to  tell the compiler things that it can't
          determine for itself.  Such  assertions  might  either  tell  the
          compiler  that  a  particular optimization is possible, or that a
          particular plausible assumption is not valid in  this  case.  (In
          check  mode,  the  compiler  might  generate  code  to  check the
          validity of such assertions, and to cause an error  if  they  are
          false.)  In the example case above, the programmer might code:

               assert i <> j;
               a [i] := 2;
               a [j] := 3;
               b := a [i];

          A  similar  strategy  would  be  to  provide  a mechanism for the
          programmer to explicitly allow or disallow a particular class  of
          optimizations,   either  throughout  a  compilation  unit  (e.g.,
          "procedure  p  options  no_array_opt")  or  with  respect  to   a
          particular  variable,  type,  etc.  (e.g., "var x:  unpredictable
          integer").

     Generated Assertions.  When confronted with a potential  optimization,
          but  with  insufficient  information  to  determine  whether  the
          optimization is valid, the compiler has the option of  generating
          assertions  about  the  state  of  the  program  at  the point in
          question, and then attempting to prove or  disprove  them.  Since
          the  proof  of  assertions  about  programs  is  an  exorbitantly
          expensive task (and one which frequently  has  no  solution),  we
          have   not  proposed  making  use  of  special-purpose  assertion
          verification in this paper.

          The proposals in the discussions below tend to opt for simplicity
     in  most  cases.  At  best,  optimization  will  be  a  highly complex
     process; by implementing simple optimizations  first,  we  can  decide
     whether (and where) further effort is necessary to obtain satisfactory
     results.






     CIN-#3
                                     - 3 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


     2.   Records

          The available information about a record variable is  simply  the
     set  of  all the available information about the fields of the record.
     For the simple case (records with no variants), this  means  that  the
     information   about  a  record  can  simply  be  updated  whenever  an
     assignment to a field of the record is encountered; and if one  entire
     record  is  assigned to another, the information about the destination
     record can be updated to correspond to that about the source record.

          The analysis becomes slightly more complex when the records  have
     variants,  since  field  names  in different variants may refer to the
     same storage location.  We have chosen to assume that an assignment to
     the  tag  field  invalidates  all  information about any fields in the
     variant part.  So long as the tag field is not changed, fields in  the
     variant  part may be treated like fields in the fixed part.  This is a
     reasonable assumption, since assignment to a field in a variant  other
     than  the one selected by the current tag is forbidden by the language
     definition.  It would be possible  to  check  assignments  to  variant
     fields  for  consistency with tag field values, either at compile time
     (if the tag field value is known), or at run time.  At present, we  do
     not propose to perform such checks.

          If  the  record  is  an undiscriminated union (there is a variant
     part, but no tag field), then it is treated much like a normal variant
     record.  Assignment  to  a  variant field leaves all information about
     other  fields  in  the  same  variant  part  unchanged.  However,   it
     invalidates all information about fields in other variant parts.




     3.   Arrays

          The  problems  with  arrays are significantly more difficult than
     the corresponding problems with records.  Which field of a  record  is
     being  referenced  is uniquely determined by the field name; but which
     element of an array is being referenced is determined by the value  of
     an  expression,  and  expression  values  are  in general not known at
     compile  time.  Thus  assignment  to  "foo[i]"  must  invalidate   all
     previous information about the values of the elements of "foo", except
     for any elements whose index expressions are absolutely known  not  to
     be equal to "i".  (The only cases where such knowledge is likely to be
     available are if we have references to "foo[i]" and "foo[i+c]",  where
     "c"  is  an  expression  whose value is known to be non-zero, or if we
     have references to "foo[c1]"  and  "foo[c2]",  where  c1  and  c2  are
     distinct  constants.)   This  means  that  in  general, information is
     available about only the most recently assigned element of  an  array.
     Furthermore,  even  this  information is invalidated when the value of
     the index expression is  changed  (e.g.,  "a[i]:=x;  i:=j;  x:=a[i]").
     Considering how rarely it will be possible to determine that two index
     expressions have necessarily distinct  values,  the  only  information
     which  it seems worthwhile to record about an array during compilation


     CIN-#3
                                     - 4 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


     is the last index expression used in assigning to the array,  and  the
     expression  which  was  assigned  to  the  selected element.  The only
     alternative is to generate an assertion of the inequality of  the  two
     array  indices,  and  attempt  to prove it.  The one exception to this
     rule is when an entire array is assigned to with an array  expression.
     In  this  case,  the  values assigned to all of the array elements are
     known.




     4.   Pointers

          The problems presented by pointers  are  very  similar  to  those
     presented   by   arrays.  In  effect,  the  set  of  all  the  pointer
     expressions which are ever used to access heap variables  of  a  given
     type  may  be  treated  very  much  like  the  set  of  all  the index
     expressions which are ever used to access elements in a  given  array.
     That is, we must assume that any two pointers which point to variables
     of the same type may, at any time, be pointing to the  same  location.
     Thus,  by  analogy with the array case, for each type for which one or
     more pointer variables are defined, it is worth our  while  to  record
     the last pointer expression used to assign to an element of that type,
     and  the  expression  which  was  assigned.  As   with   arrays,   the
     alternative  is  to  try  to  prove assertions about the inequality of
     pointer expressions.


     4.1  A General Mechanism

          The similarity between the array and pointer problems suggests  a
     general  approach  to  the  handling  of  such  problems.  The sort of
     problem we have been considering is one in which it is not possible to
     determine  which of a set of distinct variables is being referenced by
     a computed name.  What we want to  do  is  to  keep  track  of  access
     classes.  An access class is a set of variables, for which there exist
     computed names such that it is  not  possible,  at  compile  time,  to
     determine  which  variable in the set is being referenced by the name.
     Such a computed name is called a  class  name  of  its  access  class.
     Thus, all the elements of array "foo" would fall into an access class,
     and "foo[i]" would be a class name of that class.  Similarly, all  the
     heap variables of type integer would fall into an access class, and if
     "p" were declared "p: ^ integer" then "p^" would be a  class  name  of
     the class.

          The  rule  we  want to follow, then is:  (1) When a class name is
     assigned to, all current information about the variables in that class
     is  lost.  (2)  The  only  new information about the class is that the
     element selected by the value of the computed name expression has  the
     value  of  the  assigned expression.  (3) Any change in a component of
     the computed name expression invalidates that association.




     CIN-#3
                                     - 5 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


          These rules may be relaxed slightly if the elements of an  access
     class are records.  In this case, assignment to field A of one element
     of an access class does not invalidate our knowledge about  the  value
     of field B of another element of the same class, since even if the two
     elements are the same, fields A and B are distinct.  This  holds  even
     if  fields  A  and B are in different variants -- they must then be in
     different elements of the access class, since the  programmer  is  not
     allowed  to  access  an  unselected  field.  In essence, for an access
     class whose elements are records, we maintain a set of access classes,
     one  for  each  field of the record, where the relations between these
     sub-access classes are defined as:  (1) Assignment to a  field  leaves
     all  other  fields in the same variant unchanged.  (2) Assignment to a
     field in a variant of a discriminated union  leaves  fields  in  other
     variants  unchanged,  as well.  (3) Assignment to a field in a variant
     in an undiscriminated union destroys all information about  fields  in
     other  variants.  (4)  Assignment  to  a  tag field in a discriminated
     union destroys all information about fields in all  variants.  between
     records described in section 3.


     4.2  More Problems with Pointers

     The  access  class  approach  allows  a systematic solution to several
     other problems that  arise  with  the  use  of  the  special  coercion
     functions,  ADDRESS(variable),  PTR(pointer),  and PTR(integer), where
     PTR is any pointer  type  name.  For  example,  given  the  assignment
     "p := address(foo)",  we  now  must merge the access classes for "foo"
     and "p^", so that anything that can be accessed with  the  name  "foo"
     can  now  be accessed by any pointer of the same type as "p", and vice
     versa.  Similarly, after "p := ptr(q)", the  access  classes  for  the
     types  of  "p"  and "q" must be merged.  The straight-forward approach
     would be to find all such combinations throughout a  compilation  unit
     and  merge  their  access  classes.  With more effort, minimal classes
     could be produced by associating access classes with each node in  the
     program flow graph, and computing them iteratively.

          The  access  class approach would not resolve the problem created
     by the possibility of an external procedure taking the address of some
     variable accessible to a module and leaving a pointer to it somewhere.
     Our proposal here is to assume that this  will  not  occur.  We  would
     propose   a   new  variable  attribute,  "ABNORMAL".  If  there  is  a
     declaration for a variable,  and  there  is  the  possibility  of  the
     variable being referenced, anywhere in its scope, by a name other than
     its declared symbolic name, then rogrammer would be  required  to
     specify  the  "ABNORMAL"  attribute on the variable declaration.  This
     would instruct the compiler to make no assumptions about the variable.
     In  our  example  statement  in  the  introduction, if "a" or "b" were
     declared abnormal, then the expression "a+b" would have to be computed
     three times.

          A  PTR(int)  reference  creates  a  pointer  to  a  fixed storage
     location.  The two plausible uses of this function are to access fixed
     job  data  area  locations,  or  to  compute an offset with respect to


     CIN-#3
                                     - 6 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


     another pointer (e.g., PTR(ord(pointer)+c), which is  pointer  to  the
     location  "c"  words beyond the location referenced by "pointer").  We
     place all PTR(integer) references in an access class, which  we  merge
     with  the  access  classes  of  any  pointers  to  which such computed
     pointers are assigned, and with the access  classes  of  any  pointers
     which ever appear as the argument to an "ord" function call.

          We  do  not  propose  to cope with the possibility of an external
     procedure which coerces a globally accessible pointer to type "A", and
     leaves  the  result  in  a  globally  accessible  pointer of type "B".
     Similarly,  we  do  not  propose  to  cope  with   the   corresponding
     possibility  for  integer/pointer  conversions.  We will simply assume
     that such things do not happen, and leave  it  to  the  programmer  to
     disable  optimization  (or possibly only optimization as it relates to
     pointers) if such situations could arise.




     5.   Parameter Aliasing

          Parameter aliasing occurs when a subroutine can refer to the same
     variable  by  more  than  one  name.  The  phenomenon can arise when a
     global variable is bound to a var parameter of a subroutine, or when a
     single  variable  is bound to two var parameters or to a var parameter
     and a value parameter.  The consequence is  that  it  is  possible  to
     write  a  procedure  which  changes  the  value  of  a  variable by an
     assignment to what the programmer thought was  a  different  variable.
     The  problem  is particularly insidious if a var parameter and a value
     parameter are bound to the same variable, since value  parameters  are
     supposed  to  behave  like  constants for the duration of a subroutine
     invocation.  Consider the following:

          type vector = array [1..5] of char;

          procedure rotate ( vec_in: vector; var vec_out: vector );
          var i: 1 .. 5;
          begin
             for i := 1 to 5 do
                vec_out [(i mod 5) + 1] := vec_in [i];
          end;

          var vec: vector;

          ...

          rotate ( vec, vec );

          This is not merely an optimization problem, but  is  inherent  in
     the  design of the Pascal language.  No solution is currently proposed
     for it, except for a warning in the manual that the problem can occur.
     In  fact,  the  Pascal description treats the results of any
     such aliasing as undefined.  This being the case,  parameter  aliasing


     CIN-#3
                                     - 7 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


     presents  no problems for optimization, since the results of a program
     in which aliasing occurs are undefined to begin with.

          There is, however, the possibility that a programmer might  write
     a  procedure to allow for the possibility of aliasing.  In the example
     problem, for example, it would not present  any  great  difficulty  to
     modify  the "rotate" procedure so that it would work correctly even if
     its two parameters were the same vector.  If the language allowed this
     possibility,   then   optimization  could  wreak  havoc  with  such  a
     procedure.  One possible mechanism for handling such a situation would
     be  to  allow  specification  of  an ABNORMAL attribute on parameters,
     indicating that they may be modified by aliasing and that the compiler
     should  make no assumptions.  Another possibility would be an "options
     aliased_parameters" clause which could be specified on the  subroutine
     header.




     6.   Side Effects of Functions

          Side  effects  of  functions are changes in variables outside the
     function as a result of a call  to  the  function  (i.e.,  changes  to
     global  variables  and  var  parameters),  and changes in static local
     variables which may cause the function to return different  values  on
     successive calls, even with the same parameters.  As an example of the
     consequences of function side effects, consider the following:

          function f ( x: integer ): integer;
          begin
             f := a;
             a := x;
          end;

          var a, b, c: integer;

          ...

            a := 3;
            b := 5;
            c := a + f(b);

          The provisional language definition  deliberately  refrains  from
     specifying  the  order of evaluation of the operands in an expression.
     In fact, it is possible for the generated  code  not  to  evaluate  an
     operand  at all, if the value of that operand proves irrelevant to the
     value of the expression.  For example, in the case above, it would  be
     undefined  whether  the  function  would  be  evaluated first, leaving
     c = 8, or second, leaving c = 6.  The  compiler  is  allowed  absolute
     freedom to rearrange computations, subject to the following rules:

          (1) If a function might have side effects (all external functions
     are assumed to have side effects), and if the  function  appears  more


     CIN-#3
                                     - 8 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


     than  once  in  an  expression, then the generated code will contain a
     call to the function for  each  occurrence  of  the  function  in  the
     expression.  ("x := f(x)*f(x)"  will  not  be  replaced by "t := f(x);
     x := t*t".)

          (2) If statement A precedes statement B in  the  source  program,
     and  statement  A  contains a call to a function which might have side
     effects, then the call to the  function  will  precede  the  code  for
     statement B in the generated code.

          (3)  In  general,  the  compiler may delete the computation of an
     expression from the program if it can determine that the value of  the
     expression  is  irrelevant  to  the  execution  of the program.  (This
     includes cases such as arithmetic expressions which are multiplied  by
     constant  zero, as well as expressions which are assigned to variables
     which are never used again.)  However,  to  allow  the  programmer  to
     force  the  evaluation  of a function with side effects, an expression
     which consists only of a call to a function  with  side  effects,  and
     which  is assigned to a variable, will be called even if its result is
     never used.

          For example, if you want to make sure that function P  is  called
     in  the  statement  "if (a=b) or P(x) then",  you  can  recode  it  as
     "temp := P(x); if (a=b) or temp then".  If you want to call a function
     for  its  side  effects, but you are not interested in the result, you
     can always type "temp := F(...)",  and  be  assured  that  F  will  be
     called, even if "temp" is never used again.  Taking the example at the
     beginning of this section, if you want to make sure that the old value
     of  "a"  (before the function call) is used (i.e., that the expression
     is evaluated as  "a + f(x)"),  you  can  write  "t1 := a;  t2 := f(x);
     ... t1 + t2".




     7.   Side Effects, Part 2

          In  addition  to  the  specific  problems  discussed  in the last
     section, there is the whole question of determining just what the side
     effects of a function or procedure call are going to be.  For example,
     if a variable "x" is changed by a procedure "p", then in the  sequence
     "x := 2;  p;  y := x"  we don't want to replace the last assignment by
     "y := 2".  There are two cases to be considered -- the side effects of
     calls  to  subroutines  in this module, which we can actually look at,
     and the side effects of calls to external subroutines, about which  we
     know nothing at all.


     7.1  Side Effects of External Subroutine Calls

          The  simplest  solution  here is the safety-first solution.  This
     would assume the following:  (1) Any external or public  variable  may
     be  changed by an external subroutine.  (2) Any static variable in the


     CIN-#3
                                     - 9 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


     current module can be changed by an  external  subroutine,  since  the
     external  subroutine may call any public routine in the current module
     (and therefore, indirectly, any subroutine  in  the  current  module).
     (3) Any variable on the heap may be changed by an external subroutine,
     since we don't know what pointers to the  heap  may  be  available  in
     other modules.  (4) By the reasoning of (3), if the "address" function
     is ever applied to any local  variable,  we  have  to  assume  that  a
     pointer to that variable might be available to any other module, so we
     have to assume that any local  variable  which  is  ever  used  as  an
     argument   in  an  "address"  call  can  be  changed  by  an  external
     subroutine.  (5) Since the results of changing a parameter other  than
     by  its parameter name are undefined, we may assume that no call to an
     external subroutine will change any parameter of the current routine.

          Putting all this together, we see that the only variables we  can
     assume  to be unchanged by an external subroutine call are those which
     (a) are parameters  or  non-static  local  variables  of  the  current
     subroutine  or  of a subroutine containing the current subroutine, and
     (b) which never occur as arguments to the "address" function.  If this
     seems too severe, there are a number of other alternatives for keeping
     track of the variables changed by an external procedure call.  (1) The
     external  subroutine  declaration  syntax  could  be  expanded  with a
     "global" list of variables changed (directly  or  indirectly)  by  the
     subroutine.  If  such  a  list were not specified, we could assume the
     worst, so the specification of the globals  list  would  be  optional.
     (2) Given global cross reference information about the entire program,
     it would be possible to actually check  the  possible  effects  of  an
     external subroutine.  (3) Variables could be declared with an ABNORMAL
     attribute if they could be changed externally.  (4) We could  allow  a
     READONLY attribute on public and external variable declarations.  This
     would indicate that the variable could be changed only by  the  module
     in  which  it was declared as public, and not in any of the modules in
     which it was declared as external.  (5) A public subroutine  could  be
     declared  with  an  NONRECURSIVE attribute, indicating that no call be
     that subroutine can ever cause it to  be  called  recursively  (either
     directly or indirectly).


     7.2  Side Effects of Intra-Module Subroutine Calls

          As  we compile a subroutine, we can make a list of all the global
     variables and all the data types on the heap that are changed  by  the
     subroutine.  Note  that this 'summary data flow analysis' is recursive
     by nature, since the set of  changed  variables  for  a  routine  must
     include  all  the  variables  changed by any routines that the routine
     calls.  Using this summary data flow  information,  we  can  know  the
     possible  side  effects of an intra-modular subroutine call.  That is,
     when a routine calls another routine in the same module, we only  have
     to  allow for changes in the variables that we know are changed by the
     called routine.  (If a routine calls an external subroutine,  then  we
     must  add  the possible side effects of an external subroutine call to
     the  side  effects  that  we  can  compute  from  summary  data   flow
     analysis.)   We  may  assume  that  any  variable which is passed to a


     CIN-#3
                                     - 10 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


     subroutine as a var parameter will be changed in the subroutine.




     8.   Subroutine Variables and Parameters

          (1) When considering a call to subroutine P,  with  subroutine  Q
     being  passed as a parameter, we must assume that P is really going to
     call Q.  This means that we must add the side effects for  P  (summary
     or  external)  to  those  for Q, to get the total side effects for the
     call "P (..,Q,..)".

          (2) If subroutine P has  a  subroutine  parameter,  Q,  then  for
     purposes  of  summary data flow analysis of P, calls to the parameter,
     Q, may be ignored.  For the compilation of P itself,  we  must  assume
     that  Q  might  be  any subroutine of the same type as Q which is ever
     passed as a parameter.  If P is public, then Q might  be  an  external
     subroutine,  too.  (Similarly,  if  P is called by a public subroutine
     with a parameter of the same type as Q, then Q might be external.)

          (3) The presence of subroutine variables presents other problems.
     If a subroutine is passed to an external subroutine as a parameter, or
     is stored into a subroutine variable, anywhere in this module, then we
     have   no  idea  where  that  subroutine  may  become  callable  from.
     Therefore, we must assume that any call to an external subroutine  may
     invoke  any  subroutine  in  this  module  which is ever assigned to a
     subroutine variable or passed as a subroutine parameter.

          (4) By the reasoning of  (3),  whenever  we  find  a  call  to  a
     subroutine  variable, we must assume that it may actually be a call to
     an external subroutine, any public subroutine in this module with  the
     same  type  as the variable, or any subroutine in this module with the
     same type as the variable which is  ever  passed  as  a  parameter  or
     assigned to a subroutine variable.




     9.   On Units

          An  on-unit  is, in essence, a subroutine which can be invoked at
     any point in the course of a program.  Because of this,  they  present
     unique  problems for optimization.  The worst problem is that there is
     no way of knowing, during the compilation  of  a  subroutine,  whether
     there  may  be  an  on-unit,  defined  in some other module, in effect
     during the execution of the subroutine.  According to  a  safety-first
     strategy,  therefore,  we  would  have  to assume that any side effect
     which could be caused by an external subroutine  could  occur  at  any
     time.  That  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  optimization  would ever be
     possible with any external, public, or static variable.

          There are three primary alternatives to this  prospect:  (1)  The


     CIN-#3
                                     - 11 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


     programmer could limit all effects of on units to private variables of
     the modules in which the on units are declared.  Other  modules  could
     refer  to  these  variables  via access functions.  If this convention
     were followed, no on unit could ever  have  a  direct  effect  on  any
     variable  in  any other module, so the compiler would not have to make
     any special provisions for the possibility of external on  units.  (2)
     Alternatively,  the  user  could be allowed to specify as ABNORMAL any
     variables that could  be  modified  by  external  on  units.  (3)  The
     exceptional  condition  handling  mechanism could be modified so as to
     restrict  the  confusion  introduced  by  condition   handlers.   This
     possibility is discussed in more detail in a separate paper.

          If  an  on unit is defined in the current module, it is necessary
     to assume that it may be invoked at any point  where  it  is  enabled.
     Thus,  if  a statement is in the scope of an on unit, optimization can
     not be applied to any variable which is used or  modified  in  the  on
     unit.  Since determination of the scope of an on unit is difficult, it
     might be satisfactory not to apply optimization to any variable  which
     is used or modified in any on unit in the current module.




     10.  Mandatory Stores

          When   processing  an  assignment  statement,  the  compiler  may
     sometimes determine that it is unnecessary to store the value  in  the
     variable  immediately  (or at all, in some cases).  For example, given
     the sequence "t := a+b; x := t*(t-1); t := a-b;  y := t*(t-1)",  there
     is  no reason to actually store the value "a+b" in the memory location
     "t", as long as it is available in a register for the  computation  of
     "x".  For  another  example,  in  the  statement "if a>b then x := a-b
     else x := b-a", the values "a-b"  and  "b-a"  may  be  computed  in  a
     register,  and  the  register may be stored into "x" in a single store
     instruction following the if statement.  The basic  rule  for  storing
     values into variables is:  If a variable may be used elsewhere than in
     the current routine, then its current value must  be  stored  into  it
     prior   to  any  action  which  might  result  in  its  use  elsewhere
     (subroutine call, return, on signal,  etc.).  This  problem  is  quite
     similar   to   the  problem  of  the  validity  of  values  in  common
     subexpressions, as considered in many of the  previous  sections.  The
     following guidelines suggest themselves:

          (1)  Because  of  the problems of resolving computed names, array
     elements, record fields, and variables on the heap  should  always  be
     stored as soon as their values are known.

          (2)  Any  variables  which  might be used in a subroutine must be
     stored before calling that subroutine.  This problem may  be  resolved
     with  the  same  sort  of  summary  data flow analysis as the variable
     modification,  and  with  the  same  sort  of  assumptions  about  the
     variables  which  can be accessed consequent to an external subroutine
     call.


     CIN-#3
                                     - 12 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


          (3) If a subroutine which is called can return to a label in this
     routine  or  in  a routine containing this routine, then any variables
     which might be used as a result of going to that label might  be  used
     as a result of calling the subroutine, and therefore should be stored.




     11.   Summary

          This  section summarizes some of the specific alternatives raised
     by this paper, and indicates the current  state  of  our  thinking  on
     each.

     1.   Should  special user-specified assertions and options be added to
          the language?  If so, should  the  default  case  (no  option  or
          assertion  specified)  be defined for safety or efficency?  We do
          not propose to include any such features.

     2.   Should there be an ABNORMAL attribute  available  to  cover  such
          situations  as  variables whose address is made into a pointer in
          another module, aliased parameters, and variables  which  can  be
          modified  by  on  units?  We  are  not  proposing  to  include an
          ABNORMAL attribute.

     3.   Should we incur the cost of  generating  and  proving  assertions
          about   the  program  state  when  confronted  with  questionable
          situations?  We believe that it would  be  a  terrible  waste  of
          effort to do so.

     4.   We have proposed assuming that the programmer will never access a
          field in a variant of a discriminated union, other than  the  one
          which is currently selected by the tag field, and that any change
          in a field in one variant of an undiscriminated union  should  be
          assumed  to  destroy  the  values  of all the fields in all other
          variants.  Do these assumptions/restrictions seem reasonable?

     4.   We have proposed merging access classes when  confronted  with  a
          pointer-pointer  coercion,  and  making no provision for possible
          problems  arising  from  games  with  pointer-integer  coercions.
          Also,  we  have  not  proposed  any  way of allowing for possible
          effects of pointer-pointer coercions in other modules.  Are these
          assumptions reasonable?

     6.   Is the proposed prohibition on aliases for parameters reasonable?

     7.   Are  the  proposed  assumptions  and rules about side effects and
          order of evaluation reasonable?

     8.   Should we provide attributes such as  READONLY  and  NONRECURSIVE
          for  coping  with  side effects from external subroutines?  We do
          not propose to do so.



     CIN-#3
                                     - 13 -





                   Safety Considerations in the Optimization
                               of Pascal Programs


     9.   It would be possible to eliminate subroutine variables  from  the
          language,   leaving   only   subroutine  parameters.  This  would
          simplify optimization  somewhat  (but  not  greatly).  Does  this
          restriction seem desirable?



















































     CIN-#3
                                     - 14 -



  f@8Ð