






                    Overlay Manager Conversion Specification
                           for Swapping High Segments

                                 March 5, 1980


     This document is a functional  specification  for  ODMS  2.0  and  the
     supporting  runtime code.  Some of the underlying concepts of ODMS 1.4
     et. al. will be redefined in this document; it  is  assumed  that  the
     reader is familiar with the current overlay system.




     Definitions of Sharable and Non-sharable Overlays

     First,  an  overlay  is  a  section of code and data whose presence at
     runtime  is  under  control  of  the  overlay  manager.  Overlays  are
     associated with areas as in ODMS 1.4, and more than one overlay may be
     associated  with  an  area.  In  ODMS  2.0,  the   user   may   create
     non-sharable overlays, which are functionally identical to overlays in
     ODMS 1.4.  The PASCAL code placed in non-sharable overlays is compiled
     with  the OVERLAY (1) compiler option.  The overlay is associated with
     a single overlay area, declared in  the  AREAS  section  of  the  MDL,
     through  the  IN clause in the MODULES section.  Non-sharable overlays
     may have multiple versions, and may be obtained by the overlay manager
     from  either  an overlay database or from an overlay file specified by
     the user at runtime.

     Sharable overlays are not associated with declared areas,  but  rather
     with  a single area of memory reserved for sharable segments (the high
     segment on the PDP-10).  In the MDL, the  IN  clause  in  the  MODULES
     section  is  replaced  with  the  keyword  SHARABLE  (for example, QED
     SHARABLE CONTAINS ...).  The PASCAL code for  a  sharable  overlay  is
     compiled  with the OVERLAY (1) compiler option.  A sharable overlay is
     obtained by the overlay manager from a single file,  without  separate
     versions or database capability.  A default file name for the sharable
     overlay is placed in the program by ODMS (<modulename>.EXE),  and  may
     be overridden by an entry point to the overlay manager.


     User Restrictions and Requirements

     There  are  programming  restrictions for overlaid code, most of which
     are enforced by  the  compiler.  No  overlay  compilation  may  define
     public  vars  or  consts.  References  to external vars and consts are
     indirected through the symbol name; this  is  invisible  to  the  user
     code.   In   addition,   externally   visible   constants  in  overlay
     compilations are generated into the low  segment.  Externally  visible
     means  that  the possibility exists for the const to be addressed from
     PASCAL code  other  than  that  contained  in  that  compilation.  For
     example,  if  the  address  of  a  constant  is  passed to an external
     routine, then that constant must be  emitted  into  the  low  segment,









                                               High Segment Swapping Spec/2
                                                              March 5, 1980


     because  the  overlay containing the const may not be in core when the
     const is referenced.  Public constants are always externally  visible,
     although  they  may  be  declared only in MAIN (see below).  Note that
     structured  constants  passed  by  value  are  considered   externally
     visible,  as  are  all  constants passed by reference.  Also, pointers
     coerced to point to constants can  create  a  similar  situation  with
     regard  to  external visibility, although the compiler may not be able
     to detect such coercions.  Pascal code used in overlaid  programs  may
     not  generate  actual  subroutine  values, although such values may be
     used freely if obtained elsewhere.  For example, an assembly  language
     routine  may  generate  the address and frame pointer for a subroutine
     value if the address generated is the transfer vector address for that
     subroutine.  In  this  manner,  the subroutine may be invoked by value
     from any point in the program, and the overlay manager will  correctly
     dispatch to it.


     MAIN and Resident Code

     Every  program  contains  one "sharable overlay" called MAIN, which is
     contained in the file <programname>.EXE.  MAIN may contain public vars
     and  consts,  available  to  the  entire  program (including all other
     overlays).  If MAIN is not the only sharable overlay present, then the
     PASCAL  code  used  in MAIN is compiled using the OVERLAY (2) compiler
     option.  This places consts in the low segment, and forbids generation
     of  actual subroutine values, but permits public declarations and does
     not indirect for external vars and consts.  In the MDL,  routines  may
     be  declared  in MAIN as in any other sharable overlay.  However, MAIN
     is the only overlay in which symbols for public vars and consts may be
     declared.  In addition, the file containing MAIN cannot be replaced at
     runtime through the runtime manager entry point; one  might  think  of
     this  as  an  attempt  to replace an active block (the program block),
     although  there  is  a  more  important  reason  for  forbidding   the
     replacement of MAIN, to be explained below.

     Resident  code is now contained in every sharable overlay.  The master
     transfer vector (MTV), however, is contained in the low  segment,  for
     the  following  reason.  If it were in the high segment, then it would
     be contained in every sharable overlay;  if  it  were  changed,  every
     sharable  overlay would have to be rebuilt.  With the low segment MTV,
     which is contained in MAIN, only MAIN need be  rebuilt.  In  addition,
     placing  the  MTV in the low segment eliminates increasing the size of
     the entries to three words, so that each can contain  its  own  PORTAL
     .+1;  we  need  only  PORTAL  the LTV entry that jumps to OVLTV.  Each
     overlay, sharable or not, has a local transfer  vector  (LTV)  at  the
     start of its allocated area.  Symbols defined in the resident (runtime
     routines for the most part) have LTV entries at constant addresses  in
     each  sharable  overlay.  The  resident  LTV  entries  precede any LTV
     entries local to that sharable overlay.  Thus,  any  sharable  overlay
     can  be  rebuilt  without  affecting  the  accessibility  of  resident
     routines in that overlay.  Notice, however, that if  the  resident  is
     changed, all sharable overlays must be rebuilt.










                                               High Segment Swapping Spec/3
                                                              March 5, 1980


     Resident  routines are identified in the SYMBOLS section of the MDL by
     the keyword RESIDENT.  The only PASCAL runtime routines which must  be
     declared  in  the  SYMBOLS  section  are  those  which are used by any
     non-sharable overlay.  In other words, any runtime routine required by
     any  non-sharable overlay is contained in every sharable overlay.  The
     MTV entry for a resident routine has a jump to the sharable  overlay's
     LTV,  which  in  turn  PORTALs  to the actual routine entry point; the
     non-sharable overlay is linked to jump to the  MTV.  Notice,  however,
     that  sharable  overlays  can  jump  directly  to any runtime routines
     required by them; for symbols  used  only  by  sharable  overlays,  no
     SYMBOLS  declaration  is  required.  Note  that  if  any  non-sharable
     overlays are in DEBUG mode, the symbol <DEBUG.> must  be  declared  IN
     RESIDENT  in  the  SYMBOLS  section.  This prevents the loading of the
     debugger in the linking of the non-sharable overlay.

     Users may declare their own resident routines simply by declaring  the
     symbol  IN  RESIDENT in the SYMBOLS section of the MDL.  Such code may
     not have private static storage or externally visible  constants  (see
     below).  In addition, user-supplied resident code cannot reference the
     public vars and consts in MAIN, for the following  reason.  References
     to  publics  cannot  be  resolved  correctly  in  both  MAIN and other
     sharable overlays with the same resident code.  If the  user  resident
     is  compiled  (0), (2), or (3), then it accesses the publics directly,
     which will not work in a sharable overlay other than MAIN.  Similarly,
     if  it  is compiled (1), then it indirects for the publics, which will
     not work in MAIN, where the symbols are  linked  directly.  Note  that
     the  PASCAL  runtime  uses  neither explicit static storage nor public
     vars and consts.  User-supplied resident code may  not  call  routines
     outside  the  resident  (this  cannot be checked by the compiler or by
     ODMS).  ODMS must provide a means to link this explicit resident  code
     with every sharable overlay build.  This could be made the function of
     the BUILD RESIDENT USING ... command, whose former function  has  been
     replaced  by  the BUILD MAIN USING ... command.  For example, the link
     command  file  of   every   sharable   overlay   requires   the   line
     "RND:NEWOVL,/S RND:PASLIB"  to  include  the  overlay  manager and the
     system library.  The user can provide his/her own line to precede this
     one;  it  will  be placed in a secondary command file used in sharable
     overlay command files.  Maintenance of sharable overlays with  respect
     to   non-library  resident  routines  is  the  responsibility  of  the
     programmer.

     In programs which use only the default sharable overlay MAIN (programs
     that do not swap high segments), the code in MAIN can be compiled with
     the OVERLAY (3) compiler option.  This option is identical to  OVERLAY
     (2),  except that all constants are placed in the high segment.  Since
     the high segment is never  replaced,  such  constants  will  never  be
     replaced, and will always be addressable.


     Impact on Current Overlay System

     A  few  changes  to  the  compiler  will  be  required.  The  numbered
     suboptions (0) - (3) must be added to the OVERLAY option; OVERLAY  (0)









                                               High Segment Swapping Spec/4
                                                              March 5, 1980


     is  equivalent  to  NOOVERLAY,  while OVERLAY is equivalent to OVERLAY
     (1).  Suboptions  (2)   and   (3)   represent   increasingly   relaxed
     restrictions   on   user   code.  The  OVERLAY  (1-3)  options  forbid
     generation of actual subroutine  values.  The  OVERLAY  (1-2)  options
     place  externally  visible constants in the low segment of the emitted
     code.  The OVERLAY (1) option forbids the declaration of  public  vars
     and  consts,  and  also causes external var and const references to be
     indirect, i.e., the cell  referenced  by  the  name  of  the  external
     contains its address.

     The  intended  use  of the suboptions is as follows:  (1) for all code
     contained in any overlay, sharable or non-sharable, except  MAIN;  (2)
     for  code  contained  in  the  MAIN  sharable overlay when the program
     contains other sharable overlays; (3) for code in MAIN when  no  other
     sharables exist.

     The  changes  to  the runtime overlay manager are manifold; the MTV is
     now in the low segment of MAIN, and negative module  indices  indicate
     sharable  overlays,  to  be  read  in with a GETSEG monitor call.  The
     module table entry for every sharable overlay needs room at runtime to
     contain  the  file  name  of the .EXE file containing it, and an entry
     point must be provided to change this file name dynamically.  The  low
     segment initialization code (when an overlay is first read in) must be
     extended to initialize the private low segment of a sharable  overlay,
     taking this initialization directly from the .EXE file used.  The LTVs
     in the sharable overlays should use PORTALs to  dispatch  to  resident
     routines,  since  the  location of the caller is unknown.  LTV entries
     for user symbols in that overlay can be JRSTs, since the caller is the
     overlay  manager, which is in that high segment.  Two new public entry
     points to the overlay manager will not only have to be  declared,  but
     also placed in the LTV of every sharable overlay with a PORTAL.  These
     entries should not appear on the MTV.  <OVLTV.> is the original  entry
     called  from  the  MTV  to bring in an overlay.  <OVDSP.> is jumped to
     after a GETSEG brings in a new sharable  overlay;  the  stack  control
     information  is set up and the routine dispatched.  The code for doing
     the GETSEG call is at the start of the MTV,  in  the  low  segment  of
     MAIN, and looks like this:

     DOSEG.:: MOVEM   R0,SAVE
              MOVE    R0,REGSAV
              BLT     R0,SAVE+17
              GETSEG  DSARG.
              BARF
              MOVS    R0,REGSAV
              BLT     R0,17
              MOVE    R0,SAVE
              JRST    OV.DSP
     REGSAV:  XWD     1,SAVE+1
     DSARG.:  BLOCK   6           ; args for GETSEG, previously set up
     SAVE:    BLOCK   20          ; save all regs across

     Finally,  <OVRTN.>  is  now  public  and  has a LTV entry; the overlay
     manager fixes  up  an  overlaid  routine's  return  address  with  the









                                               High Segment Swapping Spec/5
                                                              March 5, 1980


     transfer  vector  location,  and  the PORTAL catches the return from a
     non-sharable overlay to a potentially execute  only  sharable  overlay
     containing  the  overlay  manager.  Since  the  overlay  manager  must
     include the transfer vector address in its code, and since it  defines
     <OVRTN.>  itself,  the  transfer vector entry for this symbol is given
     the name <OV.RTN>.  Similarly, the DOSEG. routine given above jumps to
     the transfer vector entry for <OVDSP.>, which is <OV.DSP>.  This is to
     access the dispatcher in the new sharable  overlay  through  the  LTV,
     which is defined as the alternate symbol name in MAIN's build.

     In  order  for  TENIO  to work correctly, we need a special version of
     PASDIS, which dispatches to the symbol <TEN.IO>  in  the  LTV  of  the
     current  high segment.  This in turn PORTALs to <DISPT.>, which is the
     address of the standard TENIO LUUO  dispatcher.  The  overlay  manager
     uses  TENIO,  so  it  is  acceptable  to  include it in every overlaid
     program.  Thus, <TEN.IO> and <DISPT.> are known symbols which must  be
     vectored  in  every  program  which  swaps  high segments, as must the
     overlay manager symbols described above.

     The MTV is in the low segment of MAIN; the low segment  layout  is  as
     follows:  the  MTV;  private  static  for  each overlay if needed; the
     overlay areas; the static storage (and public  vars  and  consts)  for
     MAIN.  Fortunately, this is all initialized when MAIN is invoked.  The
     criterion for the layout  of  the  low  segment  is  to  minimize  the
     dependency  of  rebuilding  required.  Since  the  MTV cannot be moved
     without requiring the rebuilding of every overlay which calls  entries
     in  the  runtime or in another overlay, the MTV should be first in the
     low segment.  In this manner, the MTV need never be moved because of a
     rebuild.

     This  organization presents the following situations requiring various
     rebuilds:

       1. A symbol is added to the resident, where there is no  FILLER
          IN   RESIDENT   entry  available.  Every  sharable  overlay,
          including MAIN, must be rebuilt, along with any non-sharable
          overlays referencing the new symbol.

       2. A  symbol  is  added to an overlay, where there is no FILLER
          entry available.  That overlay, and MAIN, must  be  rebuilt,
          along with any overlay referencing the new symbol.

       3. A  procedure is added to the resident, and there is a FILLER
          IN RESIDENT entry  available.  MAIN  must  be  rebuilt;  any
          overlays  referencing  the  new  symbol must be rebuilt.  In
          addition, if any non-sharable  overlay  references  the  new
          symbol, then every sharable overlay must be rebuilt.

       4. A symbol is added to an overlay, and there is a FILLER entry
          available.  MAIN must be rebuilt,  along  with  the  overlay
          containing  the  new  symbol and any overlay referencing the
          new symbol.










                                               High Segment Swapping Spec/6
                                                              March 5, 1980


       5. A public var or const is added to  MAIN.  Whether  a  FILLER
          VAR IN MAIN entry is available or not, MAIN must be rebuilt,
          along with any overlay referencing the new symbol.

     Note that in all above cases, it is assumed that new  entries  in  the
     SYMBOLS section are appended to the previous SYMBOLS list, and also to
     the end of the  CONTAINS  clause  for  that  module.  Should  the  new
     SYMBOLS  section  overflow  the  SIZE  clause  in  the SYMBOLS section
     header, the entire system must be rebuilt.  If  an  overlay  overflows
     its  private  static  area,  and  the  area  is increased in size, all
     non-sharable overlays must be rebuilt, along with MAIN, and any  other
     sharable overlay whose STORAGE declaration follows the overflowed one.
     If a non-sharable overlay overflows its code area, and the size of the
     area  is  increased, MAIN must be rebuilt, along with any non-sharable
     overlay whose  code  area  follows  the  overflowed  one.  The  static
     storage area for MAIN is predefined cannot be overflowed.

     The  overlay manager must initialize its tables dynamically, using the
     initialization entry point mechanism used in the runtime.  Since  this
     information  changes  for  each  overlaid  program, ODMS should emit a
     block in the constant section of MAIN initializing the tables, and the
     manager  will  BLT  to initialize.  This block will be concatenated to
     the LTV in MAIN.  The overlay manager, being  part  of  the  resident,
     cannot  have  explicit  static storage; in order to use the PASLIB PSA
     system, it must be made part of PASLIB.  The  initialization  bit  for
     MAIN  segment  must  be set, since entry points in MAIN may be called,
     and we would not want to stomp all over the program's public vars  and
     consts.  This  is  the  main  reason for forbidding the replacement of
     MAIN at runtime.


     Impact on ODMS

     ODMS will require fairly extensive  overhaul.  Fortunately,  the  only
     changes  to  the  MDL  required  are  the  addition  of  SHARABLE as a
     replacement to the IN clause for module declarations, and the addition
     of a SIZE clause to the SYMBOLS section header.  This SIZE defines the
     space allocated for the MTV.  For example, SYMBOLS SIZE 1000B.

     Symbols in the MDL corresponding to VARs and CONSTs can be declared in
     MAIN only.  These declarations create one-word MTV entries pointing to
     the vars and consts.  The opcode  here  should  be  zero,  to  prevent
     accidental branching.  The keywords VAR, CONST, PROCEDURE and FUNCTION
     now make a difference in the MDL, and must  be  used  as  appropriate.
     The  symbol  declaration  X PROCEDURE IN RESIDENT must appear for each
     runtime symbol X referenced by a non-sharable overlay, as well as  for
     any  user-defined  resident routines.  The only true symbol references
     made by the MTV (as opposed to constant LTV pointers defined by  ODMS)
     are  to public vars and consts.  Since these are defined only in MAIN,
     they are resolvable.  Note that  the  overlay  static  areas  and  the
     overlay  areas themselves must be reserved in the low segment of MAIN,
     as well as the MTV and the static storage for MAIN.










                                               High Segment Swapping Spec/7
                                                              March 5, 1980


     Entries in  the  MTV  are  the  same  for  sharable  and  non-sharable
     overlays.  The  first  word  is  a  PUSHJ to the overlay manager entry
     point; the left halfword of the  second  word  is  the  module  index,
     negative  for  sharable  overlays  and positive for non-sharables; the
     right halfword is the local transfer vector address within the overlay
     for the desired entry point.  Symbols defined as PROCEDURE IN RESIDENT
     have a one word MTV entry, which is a JRST to a predefined LTV address
     within each sharable overlay.  The LTV entry is a PORTAL to the actual
     entry point.  The LTV entries for resident procedures must be  at  the
     same  address in each sharable overlay; since they must be included in
     every sharable overlay,  they  should  precede  the  LTV  entries  for
     procedures  defined  within  that  overlay  (as  ordered by a CONTAINS
     clause).  If the set of RESIDENT symbols is changed so  as  to  change
     the  size  of  the  constant LTV needed, all sharable overlays must be
     rebuilt.  Thus, a few FILLER PROCEDURE  IN  RESIDENT  entries  in  the
     SYMBOLS section are suggested to minimize this rebuilding.

     The  routine MODMAK in ODMS should be modified to accept .EXE files as
     input, converting them into .OVL files.  A better solution here is  to
     make  the  runtime  manager  accept  the  .EXE  files produced by LINK
     directly.  Thus, programmers debugging overlay modules need not invoke
     ODMS  to  convert the .EXE into a .OVL suitable for execution, but can
     merely run the system using the result of running  the  build  command
     file.

     A  more  useful  error detection system for user command lines is also
     indicated.  The redefinition  of  the  command  BUILD  RESIDENT  USING
     ... should be done; this is as simple as storing the USING string in a
     program variable for  subsequent  inclusion  in  the  .CMD  files  for
     sharable  overlays.  One  could  use  the  line  "@<programname>.RCF",
     placing the user specified resident line in the file <programname>.RCF
     (resident command file).  Finally, ODMS can be converted to use PASCAL
     binary I/O without too much work.


     How to Make the Debugger Work

     The current system used by the  debugger  to  manipulate  overlays  in
     overlaid programs would not work with overlays containing the debugger
     itself.  Internal debugger return addresses in one overlay  would  not
     necessarily  be  valid  in  another  overlay.  There  are two apparent
     methods of resolving this problem.

     The debugger could be placed at the same  address  in  every  sharable
     overlay;  return address conflicts could therefore never occur.  Since
     the debugger is one of the first items included in  PASLIB,  this  may
     seem  feasible.  However,  the LTVs of different sharable overlays are
     not necessarily the same length, since different overlays  can  define
     different numbers of public entry points.  This would offset the start
     of debugger code by the difference in  the  number  of  entries.  This
     could  be  resolved  by padding out each sharable LTV to the length of
     the largest one.  Unfortunately, each sharable overlay would  have  to
     be  rebuilt  if  this largest LTV size ever increased.  An alternative









                                               High Segment Swapping Spec/8
                                                              March 5, 1980


     here is to place the debugger code (of constant size) before  the  LTV
     in  a  debug overlay.  The implications of doing so are that debug and
     non-debug overlay modules would be incompatible; the main  would  have
     to  be  rebuilt  every  time  a high segment was changed from debug to
     non-debug, in order to change the  LTV  addresses  in  the  MTV.  ODMS
     would  not need to know the size of the debugger; the LTV addresses in
     the MTV could be specified as additive  displacements  from  a  public
     symbol defined as the start of a sharable overlay's LTV, if indeed the
     sharable overlay is in DEBUG mode.  Since the MAIN must be linked with
     the  debugger if any part of the program is in DEBUG mode, this public
     symbol could be defined by MAIN's LTV, and would be the same in  every
     sharable overlay.  Symbols in non-DEBUG sharable overlays would not be
     defined as additive displacements off an external,  but  as  constants
     off 400010.

     The  other  method is to include the debugger code in the low segment.
     No return address conflicts would ever occur since the  debugger  code
     would  neither be replaced nor moved.  The debugger code would then be
     part of MAIN, perhaps appended to the MAIN  static  area.  Thus,  only
     the  MAIN would require rebuilding to eliminate the debugger, if calls
     to STMT. were intercepted by a no-op routine.  If  the  debugger  were
     part of the resident, it would have to use the PASLIB mechanism to get
     and initialize its static storage.  If it is only  included  in  MAIN,
     however, it may have explicit static storage without loader relocation
     problems.  Therefore, a low segment  debugger  need  not  be  part  of
     PASLIB.  Note  that relocating debugger code to the low segment cannot
     be done at load time; i.e., the high segment relocation  value  cannot
     take  on two distinct values to place debugger code in the low segment
     and the remainder of the  code  in  the  high  segment.  Therefore,  a
     special  (set  of)  .REL file(s) must be created in which the debugger
     code is placed in the low segment contribution.

     When placing the debugger in the low segment, its library requirements
     must  be  vectored  through  the  LTV  in  the  current  high segment.
     Unfortunately, the debugger is linked in  the  low  segment  of  MAIN,
     which has those library symbols defined somewhere in the high segment.
     Therefore, the debugger code cannot be made to link to the LTV.  There
     are several solutions.

     If  the debugger code can be made to reference a different symbol name
     for a given runtime routine, that name may be used to identify the LTV
     entry  while  the  entry  itself  references  the  routine  name.  For
     example, if the debugger needs <RESET.>, we can make the debugger .REL
     files   reference  <DRT01.>,  while  MAIN's  LTV  has  an  entry  like
     "DRT01.:  PORTAL  RESET.".  This  must  be  done  for  every   routine
     required  by  the  debugger.  A  PASLIB  maintenance  program  can  be
     constructed which not only changes the code section of the .REL  files
     to  relocate  to  the  low  segment, but also prepares these pseudonym
     references.  Once this is done, the debugger is  ready  to  be  linked
     into any sharably overlaid program requiring it.

     Another   alternative   is  to  create  a  non-sharable  overlay  area
     specifically for the code of the debugger.  In this way,  the  runtime









                                               High Segment Swapping Spec/9
                                                              March 5, 1980


     routines needed by the debugger can be vectored in the SYMBOLS section
     of the MDL.  The entry into the debugger is the symbol <DEBUG$>, which
     could  be  placed  in  the  MDL as DEBUG$ PROCEDURE IN DEBUGGER, where
     DEBUGGER is the module defined for the  debugger,  in  an  area  large
     enough for it.  This has the additional advantage of not requiring the
     executable code in the debugger .REL files to be  placed  in  the  low
     segment contribution of the file.  Since the debugger uses no explicit
     static storage, this "area" need not have a private static area.  This
     solution  is  probably not the best, however, because of the low-level
     interactions between runtime and debugger.  Assuming that <DEBUG$>  is
     called  before  any other debugger entry point (entry points called by
     the overlay manager when it swaps an overlay in), we have the  problem
     of  the  overlay manager calling the debugger (via <OVL$IN>) to inform
     the debugger of the core residency of the debugger.  In  other  words,
     the  manager  calls the debugger while it is swapping the debugger in.
     These routines could be placed with the overlay manager code, however,
     leaving  the  debugger with its one entry point.  Note also that after
     the debugger is brought into its  overlay  area,  the  MTV  entry  for
     <DEBUG$>  can be modified (!) to jump directly to it.  This solves the
     problem of resolving references to resident routines, since  the  .EXE
     file containing the debugger is linked independently from MAIN.

     The  final alternative is to isolate the debugger from the rest of the
     runtime.  By using a maintenance program, a combined .REL file for the
     debugger  can be created which includes all runtime routines needed by
     the debugger.  Thus, the debugger need not reference  any  symbols  in
     the  resident.  An  experiment  shows  that  the  duplication  of such
     runtime routines will cause  an  18%  increase  in  the  size  of  the
     debugger,  from  33  to 39 P.  Note that in both this and the previous
     solution, the symbol <DEBUG$> must be vectored in the low  segment  of
     MAIN,  that  is,  the MTV.  In this way, the runtime in every sharable
     overlay can get to the debugger.  Also, the symbol  <LD$OVL>  must  be
     vectored  in  the  LTV  of  every  sharable  overlay, again to let the
     debugger get to the manager routine, and pseudonymed, to  permit  MAIN
     to  link.  The  actual routine will be called <LD.OVL>.  This solution
     thus limits control transfer between the debugger and the rest of  the
     program  to  one  entry  point in each of the debugger and the overlay
     manager.

     ODMS needs a means of specifying DEBUG in the BUILD MAIN command.  The
     keyword DEBUG can be used, for example BUILD MAIN DEBUG USING xxx.  If
     the second method (pseudonyms) is  used,  the  DEBUG  keyword  becomes
     valid  for  other sharable overlay builds.  It specifies the inclusion
     of the debugger symbols in the LTVs of the sharable overlays.  A  file
     external  to  ODMS  can  contain  the  names  and  pseudonyms of these
     symbols, for use by ODMS when creating the LTVs, and by  the  debugger
     maintenance  program  when  modifying the debugger .REL files.  If the
     MDL  includes  definitions  of  the  runtime  symbols  needed  by  the
     debugger,  then  no  new  entries in the LTVs are needed.  ODMS should
     detect such cases.  It makes sense to leave the overlay manager  entry
     point vectored in every sharable overlay, since the code size is quite
     small.  In this way, sharable overlays not in DEBUG mode can  be  used
     in  a DEBUG program.  It also seems perfectly reasonable to forbid the









                                              High Segment Swapping Spec/10
                                                              March 5, 1980


     execution of a DEBUG module in a program whose MAIN  sharable  overlay
     was not built in DEBUG mode.


     Summary

     The  changes  in  the  ODMS  system  can be divided into four classes:
     compiler, ODMS, runtime, and debugger.

       1.  The  OVERLAY  option  must  be  extended  to  provide   three
           suboptions,  either  by number or named.  The suggested names
           are:  (1) =  NOMAIN;  (2)  =  MAIN;  (3)  =  RESIDENT.  These
           options   must   enforce  the  restrictions  described  above
           concerning actual subroutine values and public and externally
           visible  constants,  and  generate  indirect  references when
           required.

       2.  The MDL for ODMS must be extended as described above.

       3.  The DEBUG option must be added to the command language,  with
           usage   dependent   upon   the  scheme  chosen  for  debugger
           inclusion.

       4.  The symbol table created by ODMS during processing of the MDL
           must  be  augmented to include transfer vector entries needed
           by the system as a whole, and by the debugger when included.

       5.  ODMS should be upgraded to use Pascal binary I/O for building
           databases.  In  addition,  the CONVERT command, involving the
           MODMAK routine, and the conversion of .HGH and .LOW files  to
           .OVL files, can be removed.

       6.  The transfer vector emitters must be upgraded to drop PORTALs
           and ARGs  when  needed.  Also,  the  <DOSEG.>  code  must  be
           emitted  at  the start of the MTV.  This code should be taken
           from a file accompanying ODMS.EXE.

       7.  The runtime overlay manager must be upgraded to use  negative
           module  indices,  and  to  associate  them with sharable high
           segments.  It  also  must  be  modified  to  read  code   and
           initialize  static  from  .EXE  files.  Finally,  the manager
           entry points for  external  files  and  version  changes  are
           buggy, and need to be rewritten.

       8.  A debugger maintenance program must be created, to generate a
           version of the  debugger  suitable  for  programs  containing
           sharable  overlays.  This will require merging of .REL files,
           and internal symbol resolution.  This may require  conversion
           of  code  to  the low segment contribution of the .REL output
           file, and renaming external  symbol  requests.  It  may  also
           require search capabilities, to fulfill debugger requests for
           PASLIB symbols.  The file ODMS.DAT  can  accompany  ODMS.EXE,
           and  contain  the  pseudonyms for runtime symbols used by the









                                              High Segment Swapping Spec/11
                                                              March 5, 1980


           debugger, as well as the <DOSEG.> code.



























































  @ˆ