











                        Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers

                                     Revision B

                                   5 January 1981






                    The general problem of  handling  exceptional
                    conditions  was discussed in LEN-#2.  LEN-#2A
                    contained   a   preliminary   proposal    for
                    exception  handling in TYMSHARE Pascal, based
                    on the exception handling mechanism  in  Ada.
                    This     paper    contains    a    functional
                    specification, based on that proposal and the
                    comments  that  were  made  about  it, and an
                    expanded discussion of implementation issues.





































          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

                                       Part I

                              Functional Specification


          1.   Basic Concepts

               An exceptional event (or simply exception) is an event which
          can  occur during the execution of a Pascal program, and normally
          causes immediate termination of the program.  An exception may be
          independent  of  the program (for example, an attention interrupt
          when a user hits the "break" key), or it may be  caused  by  some
          action  of  the  program (for example, a subscript out of bounds,
          division by zero, or illegal memory reference).

               Normally, an exception causes immediate termination  of  the
          program  it occurs in.  However, when the Pascal runtime system's
          exception manager is enabled, it will detect the occurrence of an
          exception,  and  will signal the appropriate condition instead of
          terminating the program.

               A condition is a name used in conjunction  with  the  Pascal
          signaling  and  signal  handling  feature.  The language provides
          pre-defined conditions to denote the classes of exceptions  which
          can   be   detected  by  the  runtime  exception  manager.  Other
          conditions, without any  intrinsic  meaning,  may  be  explicitly
          declared.

               Signaling  is  a  way  of  transferring  control.  When  the
          runtime exception manager detects an exception, it will signal an
          appropriate  condition.  A  program  can  also signal a condition
          explicitly, by calling the  standard  procedure  SIGNAL.  When  a
          condition  is  signaled, execution stops at the current location,
          and resumes at a handler defined elsewhere in the program.


          2.   Condition Names

               Within a program, a condition  is  denoted  by  a  condition
          name.  This  is  simply a symbol, which is subject to exactly the
          same scope rules as type names, variable identifiers, etc.

               Names for user-defined conditions are declared in  exception
          declarations.  Condition names at the outermost level of a module
          may be declared PUBLIC  or  EXTERNAL.  It  doesn't  matter  which
          module  a  public condition name is declared in, so long as it is
          declared public in exactly one  module,  and  external  in  every
          other module that uses it.

               <declaration> ::=
                  <label declaration> | <data declaration> |
                  <subroutine declaration> | <exception declaration>



                                         I-1






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

               <exception declaration> ::=
                  [ PUBLIC | EXTERNAL ] EXCEPTION
                     <identifier> [ ',' <identifier> ]*

               The  language  also  defines  a  set of standard conditions,
          which are automatically  provided  in  the  initial  environment.
          These are described in the "Standard Conditions" section below.


          3.   Condition Handlers

               Any  compound  statement  (i.e.,  a BEGIN-END statement) may
          have a handler  clause  associated  with  it.  A  handler  clause
          follows  the  statement  list  of  the  compound  statement,  and
          precedes the END keyword.  Handler clauses are  very  similar  to
          case  statements,  except  that  the  alternative statements in a
          handler clause  are  labeled  with  condition  names  instead  of
          constants.

               <compound statement> ::=
                  BEGIN <statement list> [ <handler clause> ] END

               <handler clause> ::=
                  EXCEPTION <handler> [ ';' <handler> ]* [';']

               <handler> ::=
                  <condition list> ':' <unlabeled statement>

               <condition list> ::=
                  <condition identifier> [ ',' <condition identifier> ]*  |
                  OTHERS | ALLCONDITIONS


          4.   Handling a Signaled Condition

               A  condition  may be signaled in two ways.  When the runtime
          exception  manager  detects  an  exception,  it  will  signal  an
          appropriate   standard   condition.   User   code  may  signal  a
          user-declared condition with a call  to  the  standard  procedure
          SIGNAL.  In  either  case,  execution  stops immediately, and the
          following algorithm is executed:

          [1]  The "current statement" is defined to be the statement which
               was being executed when the condition was signaled.

               If   the  current  statement  is  contained  in  a  compound
               statement which has a  handler  clause,  then  we  say  that
               handler   clause   is  active.  Similarly,  if  the  current
               statement is in a procedure or function, and  the  statement
               which  called  it is contained in a compound statement which
               has a handler clause, we say that  that  handler  clause  is
               active.  In  general,  a  handler  clause  is  active if any
               calling statement in the current call stack is contained  in


                                         I-2






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

               its compound statement.

               If  some  active  handler clause contains a handler which is
               labeled with the signaled condition or  with  ALLCONDITIONS,
               then  perform  the  signaling  algorithm, starting with step
               [2].  Otherwise, terminate the program immediately  with  an
               "unhandled   signal"   error   message.  (That  is,  if  the
               condition will never  be  handled,  then  we  terminate  the
               program   without   applying   the  rest  of  the  signaling
               algorithm,  leaving  the  program  state  intact.  See   the
               further discussion in the ALLCONDITIONS section.)

          [2]  Let  the  "current  compound  statement"  be  the  innermost
               compound statement which contains the current statement.  If
               the   current   compound  statement  has  a  handler  clause
               containing a handler which  is  labeled  with  the  signaled
               condition,  OTHERS,  or  ALLCONDITIONS, then go to step [4].
               Otherwise, go to step [3].

          [3]  If the current compound statement is the body of a procedure
               or  function,  then  terminate  this routine, redefining the
               current statement to be the statement that this routine  was
               called  from.  Otherwise,  redefine the current statement to
               be the current compound statement.  Now repeat step [2].

          [4]  Execute the handler statement  which  is  labeled  with  the
               signaled  condition, OTHERS, or ALLCONDITIONS.  (If there is
               a choice, choose the handler statement which is labeled with
               the  signaled condition.  A handler clause is not allowed to
               contain both OTHERS and ALLCONDITIONS handlers.)   Following
               completion  of the handler statement (provided it doesn't do
               a goto, stop, return, signal, etc.), continue the program as
               though   the   current   compound  statement  had  completed
               naturally.


          4.1   The SIGNAL Procedure

               The  standard  procedure  SIGNAL  may  be  called   with   a
          user-defined  condition  name  as  an  argument,  to  signal  the
          indicated condition.  User-defined conditions can be very  useful
          for  dealing  with  the  kinds  of  problems  that non-local goto
          statements are usually used for.  For example, suppose that  some
          program  must  process  command  lines, and that any error in the
          processing of a command line is to return  control  to  the  main
          command  loop  in  the  body of the program.  Traditionally, this
          would be accomplished with a goto statement from the command line
          processing  routines  back  to  the  main program.  However, with
          user-defined  conditions,  the   main   program   could   declare
          "EXCEPTION  commanderror".  Errors in the processing of a command
          line could then be signaled  with  "SIGNAL(commanderror)",  which
          would transfer control to a handler in the main program.



                                         I-3






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

               A  call  to  SIGNAL without an argument is only allowed when
          some handler is active.  Here, it resignals the  condition  whose
          signaling   caused   the   handler   to  be  activated.  This  is
          particularly useful in an OTHERS handler, which may first perform
          some  general  action,  and  then  call  SIGNAL  to  resignal the
          condition for a specific handler.


          4.2   OTHERS Handlers

               If a handler clause has no handler labeled with the name  of
          a  signaled  condition,  but  does  have  a  handler labeled with
          OTHERS, then the OTHERS handler  will  be  activated.  An  OTHERS
          handler allows a routine to perform necessary clean-up activities
          when it is terminated by the signaling of  a  condition  that  it
          doesn't  have  an  explicit  handler  for.  Therefore,  an OTHERS
          handler should end with a SIGNAL() call,  to  pass  the  signaled
          condition  on  to  an  explicit handler.  (This is not a language
          requirement,  but  an  OTHERS  handler  which  did  not  end   by
          resignaling  its  activating condition would not be useful.)  The
          following  example  illustrates  the  intended  use   of   OTHERS
          handlers:

               program example;
               exception A, B, C;

               procedure x;
               begin
                  (* may signal A, B, or C *)
               end;

               procedure p;
               var f: text;
               begin
                  ...
                  rewrite (f, ...);
                  begin
                     (* miscellaneous file processing; calls x;
                        also calls p recursively *)
                  exception
                     others:  begin close (f); signal () end
                  end;
               end (* p *);

          If  procedure  x  were  to  return  to  the  main  program with a
          non-local goto on encountering an error, then the files opened by
          the multiple, recursive invocations of procedure p could never be
          closed.  Procedure x returns to the main  program  by  signaling,
          however;  and each invocation of procedure p has its own handler,
          to close the file that  it  has  opened  before  resignaling  the
          condition.  A possible sequence of actions might be:




                                         I-4






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

               Main program calls p(1)
                  p(1) opens f1
                  p(1) calls p(2)
                     p(2) opens f2
                     p(2) calls p(3)
                        p(3) opens f3
                        p(3) calls x
                           x signals A
                        p(3)'s handler closes f3
                        p(3)'s handler resignals A
                     p(2)'s handler closes f2
                     p(2)'s handler resignals A
                  p(1)'s handler closes f1
                  p(1)'s handler resignals A
               Main program's handler for A takes control


          4.3   ALLCONDITIONS Handlers

               An OTHERS handler and an ALLCONDITIONS handler are very much
          alike:  Either may be activated if  its  handler  clause  doesn't
          have  an  explicitly  labeled  handler  for a signaled condition.
          However, their intended uses are very different, as reflected  in
          step [1] of the signaling algorithm.

               An OTHERS handler performs some specific clean-up action and
          then resignals its activating condition.  It does not handle  any
          condition  itself;  it simply allows the routine that declared it
          to clean up behind itself when it is terminated by the  signaling
          of  some  condition,  which  presumably  will  be  handled  by an
          explicit handler elsewhere in  the  program.  Consequently,  step
          [1]  of  the  signaling  algorithm will invoke the full signaling
          algorithm only if there is  an  active  handler  clause  with  an
          explicit  handler for the signaled condition:  if the only active
          handler which could handle the condition is  an  OTHERS  handler,
          then the program will simply die.

               An ALLCONDITIONS handler acts as an explicit handler for any
          condition which does not have  a  labeled  handler  in  the  same
          clause.  It  really does handle any condition which may happen to
          be signaled, and it is not expected to  resignal  the  condition.
          Thus,  you  can  use  an  ALLCONDITIONS  handler  in a program or
          subroutine when you want to be able to recover from any exception
          or  signaled  condition  --  even  ones  you  haven't thought of.
          However, you should  keep  in  mind  the  possibility  that  your
          recovery  may  be  imperfect,  since  you don't even know all the
          conditions your handler may have to recover from.  In general, it
          is  much  safer  to  explicitly  enumerate the conditions you are
          prepared to handle.






                                         I-5






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

          5.   Standard Conditions

               The language provides a collection of  standard  conditions,
          which  need  not be explicitly declared by programs that refer to
          them.  These standard conditions  are  signaled  by  the  runtime
          exception manager when it detects an exception.

               Many  standard  exceptions  have  standard  status functions
          associated with them.  Such a status function may only be invoked
          when a handler for the corresponding condition is active.

          5.1   Arithmetic Exceptions

               Any  arithmetic  exception  which  can  be  detected  by the
          implementation will cause the standard condition MATH_ERROR to be
          signaled.  The  MATH_ERROR condition may be signaled either for a
          hardware arithmetic error, such as division by zero,  or  for  an
          error  in  a  standard math function, such a negative argument to
          SQRT.

               A handler for this condition may call the standard  function
          MATHSTATUS to determine just which arithmetic exception occurred.
          MATHSTATUS  will  return  a  value   of   the   enumerated   type
          MATH_STATUS.   The   values   of   this   type   depend   on  the
          implementation, but their names  will  all  start  with  "MATH_".
          (This  means  that  no  portable  program may rely on knowing the
          names of the possible MATHSTATUS values.)


          5.2   Input/Output Exceptions

               When a fatal error occurs during the performance of  an  i/o
          operation,  the runtime system will signal the standard condition
          IO_ERROR.  A handler for this  condition  may  use  the  standard
          function  EXIOSTATUS  to determine the particular i/o error which
          occurred.  EXIOSTATUS, like IOSTATUS, returns  a  value  of  type
          IO_STATUS.  However,  IOSTATUS  always  returns a code describing
          the last i/o operation that occurred, while EXIOSTATUS returns  a
          code describing the exception that caused the IO_ERROR handler to
          be activated.

               Note that when the RETRY option  is  set  for  a  file,  the
          IO_ERROR  condition  will not be signaled until the i/o operation
          following the operation on which the error actually occurs.  This
          allows  the  program  to  detect  the  error  (with IOSTATUS) and
          correct it before the exception has a chance to occur.


          5.3   Program Exceptions

               Program exceptions are all those errors whose detection  can
          be  controlledh  the  /CHECK  option of the Pascal compiler.
          When a user exception occurs, the PROGRAM_ERROR condition will be


                                         I-6






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

          signaled.  A  PROGRAM_ERROR  handler can determine the particular
          user  exception  which  has  occurred  by  calling  the  standard
          function  PROGRAMSTATUS,  which returns a value of the enumerated
          type PROGRAM_STATUS.  The elements of this type include (but  are
          not  necessarily  limited  to)  PROGRAM_ASSERTION,  PROGRAM_CASE,
          PROGRAM_COMPATIBILITY,       PROGRAM_FILE,       PROGRAM_POINTER,
          PROGRAM_SUBSTRING, PROGRAM_SUBSCRIPT, and PROGRAM_VALUE.


          5.4   Attention and Overflow Exceptions

               Most systems provide some sort of feature to allow a user to
          interrupt an executing program.  In any implementation in which a
          program can trap such interrupts, a user interrupt will cause the
          ATTENTION condition to be signaled.

               When a call to the dynamic storage  allocator  (NEW)  causes
          the   heap   to   overflow,   the   allocator   will  signal  the
          STORAGE_OVERFLOW condition.  If a program runs out  of  space  in
          the  stack  that  Pascal  uses  for  storing  local variables and
          linkage information for procedures and functions, it will  signal
          the  STACK_OVERFLOW  condition.  (Note that if a handler for this
          condition attempts to do any procedure  or  function  calls,  the
          result will probably be another stack overflow).

          5.5   Miscellaneous Exceptions

               Most  systems  can  detect a variety of miscellaneous errors
          (for example, an illegal memory reference  on  the  PDP-10).  The
          occurrence  of  such  an  error will cause the standard condition
          SPECIAL_ERROR to be signaled.  A handler for this  condition  may
          call  the standard function SPECIALSTATUS to determine just which
          special exception occurred; this function will return a value  of
          the  enumerated type SPECIAL_STATUS.  The possible values of this
          type are completely dependent on the  implementation,  but  their
          names will all start with "SPECIAL_".

          5.6   Activating Exception Handling

               The  runtime exception manager will not always intercept all
          kinds of exceptions.  In general, the exceptions associated  with
          a  particular condition will be intercepted and signaled only if,
          somewhere in the program (not necessarily  in  the  main  program
          compilation  unit),  there  is  a handler for that condition.  An
          ALLCONDITIONS handler anywhere in  the  program  will  cause  all
          possible  exceptions  to  be  intercepted and handled through the
          signaling  system.  (This  is  an  additional   reason   to   use
          ALLCONDITIONS  handlers only when necessary.)  Consequently, if a
          program is to run with some condition constantly masked, handling
          it  only  with  the  PENDING  function  (described  in  the  next
          section), then the program must still contain a handler  for  the
          condition,  even  if  it  is  only  "begin  exception cond:  end"
          somewhere.


                                         I-7






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

          6.   Maskable Exceptions

               Most exceptions must be responded  to  immediately  --  they
          would   make  normal  continuation  of  the  program  impossible.
          However,  some  conditions  may  be  signaled  long   after   the
          occurrence  of their exceptions, allowing the program to continue
          normally in the interval.  Such exceptions are called maskable.

               It is useful to  be  able  to  tell  the  runtime  exception
          manager to defer the signaling of a maskable exception.  This can
          be done with  the  standard  procedure  call  "MASK (condition)",
          which  tells the exception manager not to signal "condition" when
          its exception occurs, but simply to make an internal note of  the
          exception.  Following a call to MASK, the condition is said to be
          masked.  A  masked  condition  whose  associated  exception   has
          actually  occurred  is  said  to  be pending.  Re-occurrence of a
          pending exception has no effect -- the only possible states for a
          masked  exception are pending and not pending.  The compiler will
          only allow MASK to be called with maskable conditions.

               A program can test whether a  masked  condition  is  pending
          with the standard function call "PENDING (condition)".  This will
          return TRUE if the condition is pending, and FALSE if it is  not.
          (It will always return FALSE if the condition is not masked.)  It
          has  the  side  effect  of  clearing  the  condition's   internal
          "pending"  flag, so that a subsequent call to PENDING will return
          FALSE unless the exception re-occurs in between.

               The standard procedure call "UNMASK (condition)"  unmasks  a
          masked  condition.  When  a  masked,  pending  condition  becomes
          unmasked, it will be signaled immediately.  MASK and UNMASK calls
          can  be  "stacked";  that  is, if condition A is not masked, then
          after the  sequence  MASK(A),  MASK(A),  UNMASK(A),  it  will  be
          masked,  but  after an additional UNMASK(A), it will be unmasked.
          A call to UNMASK with a condition which is not masked will result
          in a runtime error.

               The  standard function call "MASKED (condition)" may be used
          to determine whether a condition is masked.  It will return  TRUE
          if  the condition is masked and FALSE if it isn't.  Like MASK and
          UNMASK, MASKED may be called only  with  the  names  of  maskable
          conditions.


          7.   Sequence of Actions

               A   handler  clause  applies  only  to  the  statement  list
          preceding it.  Therefore, a condition which  is  signaled  during
          the  execution of a handler will not be handled by any handler in
          the same handler clause.

               No exceptions will be recognized between the signaling of  a
          condition  (either by SIGNAL or by the runtime exception manager)


                                         I-8






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

          and the activation of its handler.  When control is  returned  to
          the  user  program  at  the  start  of  the  handler,  exceptions
          (including any exception that  might  have  occurred  during  the
          signaling process) may once again be recognized.

               A  special  rule  is  applied  for attention exceptions.  An
          attention which occurs between the signaling of a  condition  and
          the  completion of the handler that deals with it will be ignored
          -- not just  deferred,  but  completely  disregarded.  This  rule
          provides some protection:  if a user gets impatient, and hits the
          attention key three times instead of once, the effect should be a
          single ATTENTION signal.


          8.   Miscellaneous Features

          8.1   Floating Underflow Control

               On  many  machines,  a floating-point operation whose result
          has an exponent less than the minimum allowed exponent may either
          cause  an  exception  or  simply  return zero.  A compiler option
          switch, [NO]UNDERFLOW, will allow programs to take  advantage  of
          this   flexibility   where   the   implementation   provides  it.
          UNDERFLOW, the default option, causes floating  underflow  to  be
          treated  as  an arithmetic exception.  NOUNDERFLOW causes zero to
          be returned as the result  of  any  underflowing  operation.  The
          UNDERFLOW  option  may  be  specified only on the command line or
          program statement of a main program compilation.

          8.2   Attention Masking Control

               During the debugging of a program, masking of the  attention
          condition  may  be too dangerous to be used.  (Remember that if a
          program goes into an infinite loop with the  attention  condition
          masked,  it  may  be  almost  impossible  to stop.)  Therefore, a
          compiler option switch, [NO]MASKING, is  provided.  MASKING,  the
          default  option, causes all masking features to work as described
          above.  However, when NOMASKING  is  specified,  MASK (ATTENTION)
          calls  will not cause the signaling of attention exceptions to be
          deferred.  This allows a program  to  be  written  with  all  the
          masking  calls, but without the danger of a masked infinite loop.
          The MASKING option may be specified only on the command  line  or
          program statement of a main program compilation.

          8.3   Warning Messages

               For  some  programs,  it  may  be  useful  to have a handler
          (possibly an ALLCONDITIONS  handler)  which  intercepts  a  large
          class  of  conditions,  ignores  them,  and  simply  restarts the
          program at a convenient point.  Such a handler may want to  print
          a warning message describing the condition that has been ignored.
          Therefore, there is a standard procedure EXCEPTION_MESSAGE, which
          is  called  with  no  arguments.  It  will  type,  on  the user's


                                         I-9






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

          terminal, the appropriate message for the condition that was last
          signaled.  Where  appropriate,  it  will  modify  the  message to
          indicate that it is  a  warning  message  rather  than  an  error
          message.  For  example,  following a subscript range error on the
          PDP-10, the message would be "%Subscript out of range at user  pc
          XXXXXX" rather than "?Subscript out of range ...".


          9.   Optimization Considerations

               The  Pascal  optimizer  assumes  that  it  can determine the
          effects of  the  statements  in  a  program.  In  particular,  it
          assumes  that  it  can  tell when a given statement is completely
          useless and can be safely removed from the program.  To  see  how
          this  assumption  can  be  invalidated  by  the  use of condition
          handlers, consider the following:

               begin
                  A := 0;
                  SIGNAL (X);
                  A := 1;
               exception
                  X: write (A)
               end;

          The optimizer, observing that  the  value  of  A  is  never  used
          between the time it is set to zero and the time it is set to one,
          will delete the first assignment .  Then, when the signal  occurs
          and control is transferred to the handler, the value of A that is
          written will  be  the  value  that  A  had  before  the  compound
          statement was entered.

               This  problem  is  quite a general one.  If you are going to
          write a piece of code which sets values  in  variables  with  the
          particular intention of having those values available if the code
          is interrupted by a signal  or  an  exception,  then  you  should
          explicitly  disable  optimization  for  the  compilation  of  the
          routine containing that piece of code.  (Do  this  with  "options
          *nooptimize"  to  disable  optimization  for a single routine, or
          with "options nooptimize" to disable optimization for  a  routine
          and all the other routines contained within it.)


          A.   Appendix:  Machine-Dependent Status Types

          A.1   DECsystem 10 Status Types

          MATH_STATUS:
               MATH_OK             never returned as an error code
               MATH_FLT_UND        floating underflow
               MATH_FLT_OVF        floating overflow
               MATH_INT_OVF        integer overflow
               MATH_ZERO_DIVIDE    division by zero


                                        I-10






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

               MATH_ARG_ARCSIN     argument to ARCSIN not in [-1..+1]
               MATH_ARG_ARCCOS     argument to ARCCOS not in [-1..+1]

          PROGRAM_STATUS:
               PROGRAM_OK          never returned as an error code
               PROGRAM_ASSERTION   FALSE argument in assertion call
               PROGRAM_CASE        case selector not in case label list
               PROGRAM_COMPATIBIL  lengths don't match in array assignment
               PROGRAM_FILE        NIL or undefined file in i/o call
               PROGRAM_POINTER     NIL or undefined pointer dereferenced
               PROGRAM_SUBSTRING   index or length out of bounds
               PROGRAM_SUBSCRIPT   array subscript out of bounds
               PROGRAM_VALUE       scalar value out of range

          SPECIAL_STATUS:
               SPECIAL_OK          never returned as an error code
               SPECIAL_ILL_MEM_REF illegal memory reference
               SPECIAL_ILL_INST    illegal instruction (not on Tymshare)
               SPECIAL_NEW_NEG     ALLOCATE call with a negative size
               SPECIAL_DISP_PTR    bad pointer in DISPOSE call
               SPECIAL_DISP_TWICE  DISPOSE of previously freed pointer


          A.2   VAX 11 Status Types

               Exception  handling  has not yet been implemented in the VAX
          compiler.  Any attempt to use any of the  features  described  in
          this  document  with  the VAX compiler will result in compilation
          errors.


























                                        I-11






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

                                       Part I

                              Functional Specification



          1.         Basic Concepts                                  I-1

          2.         Condition Names                                 I-1

          3.         Condition Handlers                              I-2

          4.         Handling a Signaled Condition                   I-2

          4.1           The SIGNAL Procedure                         I-3
          4.2           THERS| Handlers                              I-4
          4.3           LLCONDITIONS| Handlers                       I-5

          5.         Standard Conditions                             I-6

          5.1           Arithmetic Exceptions                        I-6
          5.2           Input/Output Exceptions                      I-6
          5.3           Program Exceptions                           I-6
          5.4           Attention and Overflow Exceptions            I-7
          5.5           Miscellaneous Exceptions                     I-7
          5.6           Activating Exception Handling                I-7

          6.         Maskable Exceptions                             I-8

          7.         Sequence of Actions                             I-8

          8.         Miscellaneous Features                          I-9

          8.1           Floating Underflow Control                   I-9
          8.2           Attention Masking Control                    I-9
          8.3           Warning Messages                             I-9

          9.         Optimization Considerations                     I-10

          A.         Appendix:  Machine-Dependent Status Types       I-10

          A.1           DECsystem 10 Status Types                    I-10
          A.2        VAX 11 Status Types                             11



















          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

                                       Part II

                                 P10 Implementation


          1.   Representation of Conditions

               In the compiled program, there is a condition cell for  each
          condition.  A  condition  cell  for a user-defined condition is a
          word containing its own address.  A condition which  is  declared
          within a module will have its cell allocated in the constant area
          for that module; if the condition name is  declared  public,  its
          cell  address  will be denoted by a global symbol in the compiled
          module.

               A  condition  cell  for  a  standard  condition  is  a  word
          allocated in the "standard condition cell block", which is simply
          a portion of the runtime  exception  manager's  PSA.  A  standard
          condition  cell contains status information for the condition, as
          follows:

               Bit 18 = 1 if the condition is maskable, 0  if  it  is  not.
                    This  bit  is defined at load time, and should never be
                    changed during execution.

               Bit 19 = 1 if a masked condition is  pending,  0  otherwise.
                    This  bit  is  cleared  at  load  time, when PENDING is
                    called, or when the condition is unmasked and signaled.
                    It  is  set if the exception occurs while the condition
                    is masked.

               Bits 0-17 = The masking count.  This is initialized to  zero
                    at  load  time.  It  is  incremented by a MASK call and
                    decremented by an UNMASK call.  If it is non-zero, then
                    the  condition  is  masked.  If  it is ever decremented
                    below zero or incremented over 777777, a runtime  error
                    must occur.


               In  compiler-generated code, a condition is represented by a
          condition address.  The  condition  address  for  a  user-defined
          condition  declared  in  the same module is simply the address of
          the  condition  cell.  The  condition  address  of  an   external
          user-defined condition is the value of the global symbol with the
          same name (which of course is  defined  as  the  address  of  the
          condition  cell  in the module where the condition is declared as
          public).

               For each standard condition, the runtime  exception  manager
          contains  a  constant  word,  whose  value  is  the offset in the
          standard condition cell block of the condition  cell,  and  whose
          address  is  denoted  by  a  global  symbol which is known to the
          compiler.  The condition address for a standard condition is  the


                                        II-1






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

          value  of  this  global  symbol.  The  standard  condition global
          symbols are:

                    MATH_ERROR         EX.MTH
                    IO_ERROR           EX.IO
                    PROGRAM_ERROR      EX.USR
                    ATTENTION          EX.ATN
                    STORAGE_OVERFLOW   EX.STO
                    STACK_OVERFLOW     EX.STK
                    SPECIAL_ERROR      EX.SPC


          2.   Runtime Entry Points

               The standard procedure and function calls are  listed  below
          with  their  generated  code.  Boolean function call entry points
          return 0 or 1 in an arbitrary result  register,  "result".  Calls
          with  a condition argument have a condition address, "cond", as a
          parameter.

                    Source Code                  Macro

                    SIGNAL (cond);               PUSHJ   TOP,SIGNL.
                                                 Z       cond

                    SIGNAL ();                   PUSHJ   TOP,RSGNL.

                    MASK (cond);                 PUSHJ   TOP,MASK.
                                                 Z       cond

                    UNMASK (cond);               PUSHJ   TOP,UNMSK.
                                                 Z       cond

                    := MASKED (cond);            PUSHJ   TOP,TSMSK.
                                                 Z       result,cond

                    := PENDING (cond);           PUSHJ   TOP,PEND.
                                                 Z       result,cond

                    EXCEPTION_MESSAGE ();        PUSHJ   TOP,EX.MSG


          3.   Representation of Handlers

               A handler clause is represented by a  handler  branch  table
          (HBT),  which  is  generated  in  the  code  area  for  a  normal
          compilation, and in the constant area for an overlay compilation.
          The  left  half  of the first word in the table is the address of
          the handler common entry code.  To invoke one of the handlers  in
          the table, the runtime loads the handler address into register 0,
          and then branches to the common entry code, which cleans  up  the
          program  state  --  "with" registers, for example -- and branches
          indirect through register 0 to the handler.  The  right  half  of


                                        II-2






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

          the  first  table  word  is the address of the next outer handler
          table in the same procedure, or zero if there is none.

               The second word in the table contains the address,  relative
          to  the current stack frame, of the handler state block (HSB) for
          this handler clause.  This is a two-word block, allocated in  the
          stack  frame,  which  is used by the runtime exception manager to
          store information about the state of a handler.  It is  described
          in more detail below.

               Subsequent  words  in  the  branch table contain a condition
          address in the left half, and a  handler  address  in  the  right
          half.  (The handler address is simply the address of the code for
          the particular handler.)  The last word in  the  table  indicates
          the  default action, if none of the condition addresses preceding
          it match the signaled condition.  Its left  half  is  777777,  to
          indicate  an OTHERS case, or 777776, to indicate an ALLCONDITIONS
          case.  Its right half may be a normal handler address, or it  may
          be  zero,  indicating  that  the condition is not handled by this
          handler clause, and should be resignaled.


          4.   Locating the Active Handler Clauses

               The current HBT address for a procedure is  always  kept  in
          the  left half of the fourth word of the procedure's stack frame.
          (This means that any routine which contains  a  handler  must  be
          non-quick.)   All active handler clauses in a routine may thus be
          located by starting with the current HBT, and then following  the
          links  in  the  right  half  of the first word of each HBT.  This
          chain may include HBTs both for handler clauses which  are  ready
          to   handle   a  signaled  condition,  and  for  handler  clauses
          containing a handler which has already been invoked to  handle  a
          signaled  condition,  and has not yet finished.  The two kinds of
          handler clauses may  be  distinguished  by  their  handler  state
          blocks.

               The  compiler-generated  code  keeps the current HBT address
          current by calling the EX.SET and EX.RST runtime routines.  These
          take an HBT address as a parameter:

                    PUSHJ   EX.SET
                    Z       hbt

                    PUSHJ   EX.RST
                    Z       hbt

               EX.SET  is  called  at the start of the code controlled by a
          handler clause.  It sets the current HBT address, and  marks  the
          HSB  for  the  handler  clause  as  "ready  to  handle a signaled
          condition".  At any point in the code controlled by  one  handler
          clause,  which may be the target of a branch from code controlled
          by some other handler clause, EX.RST is  called.  It  resets  the


                                        II-3






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

          current HBT address, but doesn't affect the HSB.


          5.   Handler State Blocks



               6.   The Runtime Exception Manager

               The  runtime  exception  manager  consists  of  an exception
          intercept routine for each standard  condition,  plus  a  central
          signal manager.  Intercept routines will only be loaded for those
          exceptions which are  to  be  handled  by  this  program.  In  an
          overlaid  program, the intercept routines and signal manager must
          be resident.

               Each intercept routine receives control when  its  exception
          occurs   (most   intercept   routine   modules   will   need   an
          initialization routine, to tell the monitor about  this).  Having
          done  any  exception-specific  processing,  an  exception routine
          loads the exception address (actually the  address  of  the  next
          instruction)  into  register  0  and  the address of an exception
          block into register 1, and then branches to  the  central  signal
          manager  entry  point,  "EXCPT."  ("SIGNL." and "RSGNL." likewise
          load exception and exception block addresses into registers 0 and
          1, and then branch to "EXCPT.")

               The  first word of an exception block contains the condition
          cell address in its left half.  The low-order bit  of  the  right
          half is 1 if the program may be continued following the exception
          (true for assertion errors, case label  errors,  and  attentions,
          for  example).  This  word  is followed by an ASCIZ string which,
          when preceded by "?" and followed by "at user PC XXXXXX", will be
          the appropriate error message.

               An intercept routine for an exception with several sub-cases
          (MATH_ERROR or SPECIAL_ERROR,  for  example)  must  also  have  a
          location where it can save the particular sub-condition code, and
          an entry point for the routine that returns the code.  The  entry
          points are:

                    MATHSTATUS         ST.MTH
                    USERSTATUS         ST.USR
                    IOSTATUS           IOSTL.
                    SPECIALSTATUS      ST.SPC










                                        II-4






          LEN-#2B
          Exceptions, Conditions, and Handlers
          5 January 1981

                                       Part II

                                   Implementation



          1.         Representation of Conditions                    II-1

          2.         Runtime Entry Points                            II-2

          3.         Representation of Handlers                      II-2

          4.         Locating the Active Handler Clauses             II-3


          5.         Handler State Blocks                            II-4
          6.         The Runtime Exception Manager                   II-4











































!,L‹