






                      TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 PROGRAMMER'S GUIDE

                               Table of Contents


     1.0        Introduction                            . . . . . . .  X

     2.0        Language Extensions                     . . . . . . .  X
     2.1          The SPECIAL (WORD) Compiler Option    . . . . . . .  X
     2.2          The ALLOC Compiler Option             . . . . . . .  X
     2.3          Library Routines                      . . . . . . .  X
     2.3.1          LINK-10 Mechanism                   . . . . . . .  X
     2.3.2          PASLIB                              . . . . . . .  X
     2.3.3          Other Libraries                     . . . . . . .  X

     3.0        Environment Interface                   . . . . . . .  X
     3.1          Low Segment Layout                    . . . . . . .  X
     3.2          Debugging Facilities                  . . . . . . .  X
     3.2.1          Pascal Debugger                     . . . . . . .  X
     3.2.2          The SET BREAK Command               . . . . . . .  X
     3.2.3          Pascal Traceback                    . . . . . . .  X
     3.2.4          DDT                                 . . . . . . .  X

     4.0        Input/Output Interface                  . . . . . . .  X
     4.1          Filename Interpretation               . . . . . . .  X
     4.2          Textfiles                             . . . . . . .  X
     4.2.1          ASCII Textfile Option               . . . . . . .  X
     4.2.2          CONTROL Textfile Option             . . . . . . .  X
     4.3          Typed Files                           . . . . . . .  X
     4.4          Binary Files                          . . . . . . .  X
     4.5          I/O Errors                            . . . . . . .  X
     4.6          PRESERVE Option                       . . . . . . .  X






























                                     TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/2
                                                          February 25, 1980


     1.0 -- Introduction

     The TYM-Pascal PDP-10 system is  the  central  implementation  of  the
     TYM-Pascal   language,  as  defined  in  the  TYM-Pascal  Report.  The
     compiler  runs  in  four  passes:  lexical  and  syntactic   analysis,
     optimization,  listing,  and  code generation.  The compiler outputs a
     standard PDP-10 object file  suitable  for  linking  with  the  Pascal
     library  using  DEC's  LINK-10.  Full  advantage is taken of the KL-10
     instruction set.

     The entire TYM-Pascal language is available on the PDP-10,  which  was
     the  first  machine  for which the compiler system was implemented.  A
     combination   of   language   extensions,   compiler   options,    and
     extra-lingual   subsystems   provides   a  well-developed  programming
     environment.  This document provides an  overview  of  the  TYM-PDP-10
     environment,  concentrating  on  specific  elements  of  the  language
     described in the Report as being implementation dependent.


     2.0 -- Language Extensions

     There are several features of  TYM-Pascal  on  the  PDP-10  which  are
     controlled   by   compiler   options.   Other  features  are  strictly
     extra-lingual, and are provided by libraries of special routines.


     2.1 -- The SPECIAL (WORD) Compiler Option

     The SPECIAL (WORD) compiler option controls the predefinition  of  the
     type  MACHINE_WORD.  When  this option is specified, type MACHINE_WORD
     is   defined   as   a   signed    36-bit    integer    (-400000000000B
     .. 377777777777B).   In  addition,  integral  constants  appearing  in
     program code can  specify  values  beyond  the  range  of  the  32-bit
     predefined  type  INTEGER.  This  option does not, however, affect the
     definition of INTEGER itself.


     2.2 -- The ALLOC Compiler Option

     The ALLOC compiler  option  controls  the  dynamic  memory  system  by
     selecting  a  memory allocation algorithm for the program.  The symbol
     ALCn. is requested by  the  program  compilation  when  ALLOC  (n)  is
     specified,  where  0  <=  n <= 99, and ALLOC (0) is the default.  This
     selection may be modified at link time by the explicit  definition  of
     ALCn. (the  symbol  emitted  by  the  compiler)  by the /VALUE:ALCn.:0
     command to LINK-10, and subsequent request for ALCm., where m  is  the
     desired  allocator,  by the /REQUIRE:ALCm. command.  Any such commands
     must be  given  before  the  search  of  PASLIB,  either  explicit  or
     implicit.

     At  the  current  time, there are two allocators available.  ALLOC (0)
     loads the quickfit allocator, which is computationally  efficient  but
     space  inefficient.  ALLOC  (1)  loads  a modified firstfit allocator,









                                     TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/3
                                                          February 25, 1980


     which is computationally inefficient but space efficient.  When  using
     ALLOC  (0),  the  programmer may notice the "creeping heap" phenomenon
     caused  by  incomplete  reuse  of  DISPOSEd  records.  The  ALLOC  (1)
     allocator  reuses  DISPOSEd  records  very  efficiently,  and does not
     extend the low segment until all DISPOSEd records have been  coalesced
     and   reallocated.   Programs  which  construct  and  destroy  dynamic
     structures several times during their execution will  benefit  by  the
     use of ALLOC (1).


     2.3 -- Library Routines

     Many of the operations performed within a Pascal program are performed
     by library routines, instead of by compiler-emitted code.  There is  a
     special  set  of  routines,  collectively called PASLIB, for which the
     compiler emits calls to perform standard functions.  Users  may  write
     programs using functions supplied by other libraries in the TYM-Pascal
     environment, or they may supply their own libraries.


     2.3.1 -- LINK-10 Mechanism

     A library consists of a sequence of object modules in a file.  Such  a
     file  can  be created using the FUDGE5 utility.  When LINK-10 scans an
     object module (in response to the "/S" switch), it  sees  each  object
     module  in  the  file  as  defining some number of symbols.  These are
     called "strong definitions" or "entries".  At  the  time  the  library
     search  is  started,  LINK-10 has a set of undefined symbols which are
     referenced by previously loaded program fragments.  The library search
     attempts to resolve all undefined symbol references.

     When  an object module has as an entry a symbol which LINK-10 lists as
     undefined, that object module is "pulled" into the link.  That is, the
     code and data comprising that module are included in the program.  All
     entries defined in that module are now defined within the program.

     In addition, the module may create "weak  definitions"  or  "interns".
     These  symbols  are  defined  when  the  module is pulled, but are not
     visible to LINK-10  during  a  scan.  In  other  words,  the  decision
     LINK-10 makes to pull a library module is made when the module has one
     of the currently undefined symbols defined  within  it  as  an  entry.
     When  the  module  is  pulled,  all  symbols defined by the module, as
     entries or as interns, are now defined.


     2.3.2 -- PASLIB

     The special library containing code for runtime support and predefined
     program  names  is  called  PASLIB.  Every object file produced by the
     PASCAL compiler contains a record  which  directs  LINK-10  to  search
     PASLIB before terminating the link.

     PASLIB  contains  routines  which  perform  functions  for  which  the









                                     TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/4
                                                          February 25, 1980


     emission of inline code by the compiler is  impractical.  All  routine
     names  which  are  private  to  the compiler contain a period in their
     names; the syntax of PASCAL prohibits explicit  programmer  access  to
     these  routines.  PASLIB also contains predefined user-level routines,
     such as TRACE, whose names appear directly, without conversion by  the
     compiler.

     In addition, PASLIB contains the predefined identifiers INPUT, OUTPUT,
     TTY, TTYOUTPUT, and others.  Note that since each name is  defined  as
     an  entry  in an individual module, the user may redefine any of these
     names without conflict.  The PASLIB module will not be pulled  if  the
     entry name is already defined by the time PASLIB is searched.


     2.3.3 -- Other Libraries

     An TYM-Pascal programming environment can include libraries to provide
     programmers with a multitude  of  useful  functions.  A  few  examples
     include:  RDLIB,  containing  a  well-documented  hodgepodge of common
     routines; QEDLIB, containing the functions of  the  text  editor  QED;
     IOLIB, containing a random-access disk I/O subsystem for the PDP-10.


     3.0 -- Environment Interface

     TYM-Pascal  for  the PDP-10 concentrates all system-dependent features
     in the runtime support system.  Compiler-emitted code is usable on any
     KL-10;  only  the  runtime  system  performs strictly system-dependent
     operations such as monitor calls and input/output.


     3.1 -- Low Segment Layout

     In the absence of overlaying, the static storage used by  the  program
     (all  modules)  is  allocated in the low segment, starting at location
     140, in the order in which the modules are linked.  The allocation  of
     memory  in overlaid programs is under programmer control, as explained
     in the overlay system documentation.

     The runtime does not use explicit static storage, but uses a  register
     relative  addressing  mechanism.  Storage  for  all modules using this
     mechanism is allocated by  low  segment  extension  when  the  program
     begins execution; the address of a module's static area is loaded when
     that  module  needs  to  reference  its  static.  This  mechanism   is
     exclusive to routines contained in PASLIB.

     The  program  stack  follows this storage area.  The definition of the
     symbol STACK. is the size of the stack area.  The user may  explicitly
     define  this value, either at compile time by the STORAGE directive or
     at link time by the /DEFINE:STACK.:value command to LINK-10, or let it
     default  to  4096  words.  The  runtime  system uses part of the stack
     space for file block allocation; programs which have many  files  open
     simultaneously may require a stack area larger than the default.  When









                                     TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/5
                                                          February 25, 1980


     files are closed, the space used in  this  area  is  returned  to  the
     available  stack space if possible.  Stack operations use the pushdown
     instructions;  if  the  stack  overflows,  a  hardware  exception   is
     recognized.

     The  heap,  or  dynamic memory allocation area, starts above the stack
     and grows indefinitely.  The maximum program  size  under  a  specific
     version  of  TOPS-10  may  be  exceeded when the heap grows too large.
     This event causes a runtime error.


     3.2 -- Debugging Facilities

     Several facilities are provided on the PDP-10 for debugging  purposes.
     In  addition,  TOPS-10  provides  certain  functions  which are useful
     within the TYM-Pascal environment.


     3.2.1 -- The Pascal Debugger

     The TYM-Pascal Debugger is an interactive, symbolic debugging  package
     linked  in  with user modules compiled with the DEBUG compiler option.
     The  debugger  provides  examination  and  modification   of   program
     variables,  and permits control over program statement execution.  The
     debugger is completely documented in the  TYM-Pascal  Debugger  User's
     Guide.


     3.2.2 -- The SET BREAK Command

     Certain versions of the TOPS-10 operating system provide the SET BREAK
     facility, which interrupts  program  execution  whenever  the  program
     attempts  to  examine  and/or modify a specified memory location.  The
     format of the command is SET BREAK <octaladdr> <optionlist>.  The  set
     of  options,  separated  by commas, specify the conditions for which a
     break is desired.  Typically, one uses SET BREAK <octaladdr> WRITE  to
     detect undesired modification of program variables ("demon" bugs), but
     there are other possibilities.

     The options available for the SET BREAK command are READ, WRITE,  ALL,
     EXECUTE,  and  MUUO  (monitor  reference).  The command SET BREAK NONE
     disables  all  location  monitoring.  This  command  should  be  given
     initially before setting any location break points; if this command is
     not  recognized  by  the  monitor,  the  SET  BREAK  facility  is  not
     implemented on the version of TOPS-10.

     Different  implementations  of  TOPS-10  provide  different numbers of
     words which may have breaks set on them.  Typically, only one  or  two
     words  can  be  monitored  through  a  SET  BREAK  command.  Users are
     cautioned not to assume a given TOPS-10 will  monitor  more  than  one
     location by this facility.











                                     TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/6
                                                          February 25, 1980


     3.2.3 -- The Pascal Stack Traceback

     Independent  of  the  Pascal Debugger, the runtime can provide a stack
     traceback.  This is  a  listing  of  the  names  of  currently  active
     procedures  in  the Pascal program, if the routines have been compiled
     with the TRACE compiler option.  The runtime support sets  up  TOPS-10
     control information such that the sequence of TOPS-10 monitor commands
     "REENTER; CONTINUE" will dump the stack  traceback  without  affecting
     the  state  of  the  program.  Thus,  the  user  can interrupt program
     execution, examine a traceback, and  continue  the  program.  The  SET
     BREAK facility causes an interruption exactly as if the user had typed
     a break; the "REENTER; CONTINUE" sequence can be used after an address
     break as well as a user break.

     In  addition,  the  predefined  external procedure TRACE can be called
     from the user program to print the same information on the terminal at
     any time.


     3.2.4 -- DDT

     In  almost all cases, the Pascal debugger provides sufficient power to
     debug user programs.  Use of the TOPS-10 debugging system, DDT, should
     usually  be  limited  to  debugging  the runtime and debugger, and for
     modifying programs.

     To load DDT with a Pascal program, the /D switch should be included in
     the  link,  before the explicit or implicit search of PASLIB.  Special
     problems occur with DEBUG programs linked with  DDT,  since  both  the
     Pascal debugger and DDT use location .JBDDT in the Job Data Area.  DDT
     will be entered first,  but  unless  a  DDT  breakpoint  is  set,  the
     subsequent  activation of the Pascal debugger will prevent any reentry
     into DDT.

     DDT can be used to modify programs by changing specific  instructions,
     and by adding instructions in the patch area labelled "PAT...".  Also,
     the system program FILDDT can be used to modify  an  executable  image
     file permanently, using DDT commands.


     4.0 -- Input/Output Interface

     A  major component of the Pascal library deals with performing I/O for
     Pascal programs.  Both the TENIO system (see IOLIB documentation)  and
     TOPS-10 monitor calls are used, to interface Pascal programs as simply
     as  possible.  This  section  documents   all   machine   and   system
     dependencies  originating  from the I/O interface, and also provides a
     brief description of the implementation details of the interface.

     The  Report  defines  certain  predefined  operations  in   terms   of
     predefined  primitives.  For  example,  a read with a list of items is
     defined as a sequence of  reads,  each  reading  only  one  item.  The
     compiler,  in  many  cases,  breaks  down lists of I/O operations into









                                     TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/7
                                                          February 25, 1980


     sequences of primitives, which are implemented by  the  run  time.  In
     the  following  sections,  the  primitive operations are listed.  This
     information   will   help   programmers   recognize    sequences    of
     compiler-emitted runtime calls.


     4.1 -- Filename Interpretation

     PDP-10 Pascal programmers are provided with direct access to filenames
     on TOPS-10.  Section 1.4.2.4  of  the  DEC  Operating  System  Command
     Manual defines the format of TOPS-10 filenames.  Note that wildcarding
     is not applicable in the PDP-10 Pascal system, and  that  the  default
     directory is specified differently (see below).

     All  file  names  are canonicalized before processing by the operating
     system.  The file name is separated into its  separate  components  --
     device,   filename,   extension,  and  directory  --  which  are  then
     reassembled in the correct order.  Any number of  each  component  may
     appear  in  any  order,  and the last instance of a given component is
     used in the final string.  This mechanism  permits  defaulting  and/or
     overriding  of any desired filename component.  Default components are
     given first in the filename string, while  overriding  comts  are
     given   last.  Note  that  the  FILENAME  function  returns  the  full
     specification of an open file in the correct canonical order.

     Subfile  directories  are  fully  supported  in  PDP-10  Pascal.  This
     implies  an  important distinction in the two directory specifications
     "[]" and "[,]".  The first one is used to indicate the  current  path,
     while the second is used to indicate the user's UFD.  The current path
     may be set to another UFD, or to an SFD (by the system program SETSRC,
     for  example);  the  construct  "[]" specifies the current path.  Note
     that DEC documentation (op. cit.) defines the construct "[-]" for  the
     current path.

     Component  lengths  are restricted to the maximum permissible for that
     component; the filename string is rejected if  any  component  exceeds
     its  maximum allowable length, whether it is the last instance of that
     component or not.  A device name, filename, or subfile directory  name
     is limited to 6 characters in length, while an extension is limited to
     3 characters.

     PDP-10 Pascal ignores additional filename  components  if  the  device
     field specifies a record device (a terminal, for example) instead of a
     disk.  Thus, the presence of the string "TTY:", which  is  interpreted
     as  the  program's  controlling  terminal  for  both input and output,
     overrides    any    other    components    present.     The     string
     "TTY:FOO.TMP[,,ICK]"  will  be correctly associated with the terminal,
     as would any physical device specification.  Ersatz device  names  are
     interpreted by TOPS-10, and treated by the PASCAL filename parser as a
     device name.  A path associated with an ersatz device  name  overrides
     any explicit path specification in the filename string.

     If no filename string is given to one of the association procedures, a









                                     TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/8
                                                          February 25, 1980


     default file name is taken from the name of the file reference used in
     the  call,  as  follows.  First,  the  file reference must be a simple
     variable.  The name of that variable is truncated to six characters if
     necessary,  and  the  default  extension  ".PIO" is concatenated.  The
     resulting string is treated as a user-supplied  string.  Therefore,  a
     "standard"  PASCAL  program  using the predefined file variables INPUT
     and OUTPUT would use the files INPUT.PIO and OUTPUT.PIO  respectively.
     The  two exceptions to this rule are the predefined textfile variables
     TTY and TTYOUTPUT, which use the string "TTY:" by default.  Note  that
     FILENAME  of  a  textfile associated with the terminal will return the
     physical name of the device, and not "TTY:".

     The use of the library search and alternate path facilities of TOPS-10
     (as controlled by the LIB and CP commands to the system program SETSRC
     respectively) can cause a Pascal program to  give  somewhat  confusing
     results when manipulating files.  First, note that "[,]" is the UFD of
     the PPN running the job, which is independent of  any  alternate  path
     selected via SETSRC, while "[]" specifies the current path, controlled
     by the CP command.  However, the privileges given the user by  TOPS-10
     to create, write, and read files are a function of the PPN of the job.
     Even if the path is set to another UFD, both the  other  UFD  and  any
     files  used  on  that  UFD  must  have the appropriate protections for
     access by another PPN.

     Second, TOPS-10 attempts to rewrite an existing file before creating a
     new one.  When a filename given to the Pascal runtime does not have an
     explicit PPN or  path  designation  (e.g.,  "FOO.TMP"),  TOPS-10  will
     supersede  an  existing file with that name before creating a new one.
     Specifically, if a file of that name exists on a path specified as the
     library  search  path  by  the LIB command to SETSRC, and the user has
     privilege to write to that file (and to write on that UFD or SFD),  it
     will  be  superseded,  and  no new file will be created on the current
     path.  This can be circumvented by  "[]"  or  "[,]"  as  part  of  the
     filename  specification;  be  careful  when  using the LIB search path
     facility.


     4.2 -- Textfiles

     The textfile model used in TYM-PASCAL was  inspired  in  part  by  the
     textfile  format  under  TOPS-10.  Therefore,  the  interface  between
     textfile operations and  operating  system  functions  is  smooth  and
     relatively efficient.

     Textfiles  on  the  PDP-10 consist of streams of characters, which are
     represented as 5 7-bit bytes left justified in a  36-bit  word.  Lines
     are  terminated  by  a  line  feed  (LF)  character,  which is usually
     preceded by a carriage return (CR).  There is no  defined  format  for
     page  marks.  Lines  from  terminal  devices  have  a LF automatically
     appended to every CR.  Finally, completely zero bytes are  ignored  at
     all times.

     Textfile  I/O is implemented using buffered I/O.  When writing a file,









                                     TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/9
                                                          February 25, 1980


     the REWRITE operation creates a  new  copy  of  the  old  file  to  be
     written.  The  old  generation  of the file still exists, and is still
     available to anyone else in the system wishing to read it.  Concurrent
     writing  is not permitted.  When the output file is CLOSEd, the former
     generation is either destroyed, or marked for destroy when all readers
     terminate.  Subsequent readers or writers will get the new version.

     Formatted  textfile  input  and  output,  as  well  as  getstring  and
     putstring, are  implemented  using  pairs  of  producer  and  consumer
     coroutines.  For  example, there is an integer producer for writes and
     putstrings, and an integer consumer for reads  and  getstrings.  Thus,
     relatively  little  additional  code  was  required in the run time to
     implement  getstring  and  putstring.  The  compiler  emits   external
     requests  for certain symbols to load a given producer or consumer for
     some text conversion function.  Only routines actually required at run
     time  are  therefore loaded.  The primitive operations are GET and PUT
     for single character operations, and a single call for each item in an
     I/O  list.  There  are  distinct entry points for each of read, write,
     getstring, and putstring, with a parameter distinguishing the type  of
     the  item  (integer,  real, string, etc.).  Finally, there are entries
     for readln, writeln, and PAGE.

     One of the most common  operations  in  Pascal  textfile  I/O  is  the
     reading  of  a  line  of text from a file and assigning it to a string
     variable whose length is the length of the line.  The naive approach:

          str := '';
          while not eoln (f) do begin
            str := str || f^;
            get (f)
            end;

     Programmers familiar with the old version of  Pascal  will  know  that
     repeated concatenations are expensive, and that filling a packed array
     x of char with the characters  of  the  line  and  then  assigning  is
     better:

          i := 0;
          while not eoln (f) do begin
            i := i + 1;
            x[i] := f^;
            get (f)
            end;
          str := substr (x, 1, i);

     However,  the new Pascal language permits string-compatible references
     in a read or getstring list; substrings and packed arrays are  handled
     as if the string containing the line (not exceeding the maximum length
     of the reference) is assigned to the item, with padding or  truncation
     as needed.  The above example then becomes:

          read (f, str);










                                    TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/10
                                                          February 25, 1980


     Reading  into  a  string  is  considerably  more  efficient in the new
     Pascal-10 system than either  of  the  two  methods  described  above.
     Also,  reading  strings  presents a more symmetrical way to read lines
     from a disk file.  If line  length  is  not  to  exceed  the  declared
     maximum  length  for  a string, the following sequence may be used for
     reading lines:

          reset (f, name);
          . . .
          readln (f, str);

     With the above approach, any lines longer than  the  declared  maximum
     length of str are truncated.  If this truncation is undesirable, or if
     one is reading lines from the interactive teletype, a read may be used
     instead  of  a readln; if EOLN(f) is false after such a read, the line
     in the file is too long,  but  the  overflowed  characters  are  still
     available through another read.  Note also that the first two examples
     above do not  check  for  string  overflow,  which  the  runtime  does
     automatically when reading a string.


     4.2.1 -- ASCII Textfile Option

     The  ASCII  option  inhibits  all  character conversion on input.  For
     technical reasons, however, zero characters occasionally  show  up  in
     the  input  stream at random places; irrespective of the ASCII option,
     all zero bytes are eliminated.  Four characters are recognized as line
     terminator characters:  line feed (LF); control-G (BEL); escape (ESC);
     control-Z (SUB).  These characters are replaced with a blank when  the
     ASCII  option  is  not  in  effect, and otherwise are available to the
     program.  In either case, they cause EOLN to become true.

     The character control-L (FF) is recognized as a page  terminator.  The
     desired  format for page marks is the sequence CR FF, which is written
     to output files by the PAGE function.  FF causes EOPAGE  and  EOLN  to
     become  true.  When  the  ASCII  option  is  not  specified, the FF is
     replaced by a blank.  An FF seen  without  a  preceding  CR  is  still
     recognized as a line and page terminator.

     The only other effects of not specifying the ASCII option is that tabs
     (control-I, HT) are expanded into blanks, and other control characters
     are  eliminated  from  the  input  stream.  When  the  ASCII option is
     specified, tabs are transmitted to  the  program,  and  other  control
     characters  are available to the program.  Note that most lines end in
     the sequence CR LF; reading a string when  ASCII  is  in  effect  will
     result in the CR being read as the last character in the string.  Tabs
     are expanded on input as is standard on PDP-10's --  there  is  a  tab
     stop every 8 characters, starting with column 9.














                                    TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/11
                                                          February 25, 1980


     4.2.2 -- CONTROL Textfile Option

     The  implementation of the CONTROL text file option involves deferring
     the output of the line terminator characters on a  writeln  until  the
     first  character  of  the next line is seen.  The EOLN bit in the file
     block is used; therefore, output files may occasionally have EOLN set.
     Note  that  the  overlining  control character, "+", causes a carriage
     return to be written without a line feed, and that the value of CURSOR
     is  the  true  carriage  position,  because  of the preceding writeln.
     Without the CONTROL option,  the  user  writes  an  explicit  carriage
     return, which increments CURSOR like any other character.  CURSOR then
     reflects the position within the overline plus the length of the first
     line plus one.


     4.3 -- Typed Files

     A  PDP-10  typed  file  is  a file divided up into integral word sized
     units.  The file's base type maps onto this number  of  36-bit  words.
     Note  that  the  operating  system  does not distinguish the different
     types of PASCAL files.  For example, a file written as a textfile  can
     be opened as a file of INTEGER.

     Both  typed  and  binary  I/O are implemented using the TENIO file I/O
     package.  TENIO uses direct access  dump  mode  file  operations.  The
     alternate generation mechanism described under textfiles (Section 4.2)
     does not work with direct access mode.  The  REWRITE  of  a  typed  or
     binary  file  fails  if  there are any other writers active; a REWRITE
     without the PRESERVE option deletes the  contents  of  the  file.  The
     file  is  then  inaccessible to other writers until a CLOSE operation.
     It is available to readers, however, who will have access to the  file
     as  it  is  being  modified by the writer.  For example, a file can be
     emptied "out from under" a reader whose  RESET  precedes  some  writer
     whose REWRITE without the PRESERVE option empties the file.  Note that
     if a program error occurs, and files are not closed,  text  files  are
     not  destroyed  by  any REWRITEs performed by the program, while typed
     and binary files are emptied by the REWRITE itself.

     A disk  block  on  the  PDP-10  is  128  words  in  length.  Disk  I/O
     operations  can  be  performed  much more efficiently in blocks of 128
     words which fall on 128 word boundaries in the  disk  file.  Also,  as
     with  most operating systems, it is more efficient to block operations
     into larger pieces if possible.  For example, it is more efficient  to
     write  2048  words  once  than  to  write  128  words  in  16 distinct
     operations.  Finally, the TENIO system underlying  the  PASCAL  system
     performs  all  its  I/O  in 128 word blocks, and provides the internal
     buffering and blocking necessary to do so.  In most cases, TENIO  will
     optimize  its  operations  with  irregularly sized items as much as is
     possible, if the operations are  not  widely  and  randomly  scattered
     through  the  file.  For  this reason, user programs should attempt to
     localize disk operations (that  is,  to  avoid  scattered,  completely
     random  access  to  files)  as  much  as is reasonable, while avoiding
     redundant operations.









                                    TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/12
                                                          February 25, 1980


     As a simple example, consider a file consisting of  two-word  records,
     sorted  on  some  key.  A  binary  search  of  such a file will find a
     desired record in order log n time, while an  exhaustive  search  will
     take  order n.  Assume for the moment that the file contains about 256
     records, making it about four  blocks  in  size.  In  this  case,  the
     average  binary  search  will  examine 7 records, while the sequential
     search will examine 128.  Notice, however, that the number  of  actual
     disk  accesses  performed  by  TENIO will be about the same, since the
     midpoints of the binary search would come very  close  to  falling  on
     separate  disk blocks, each requiring an input operation.  If the file
     were any smaller, the overhead involved in random access in the binary
     search  would probably exceed the cost of examining additional records
     in the sequential search.  If the record size were not a power  of  2,
     this  extra cost would increase even further, since individual records
     would straddle disk boundaries.

     The point here is that minimizing source level  operations  using  I/O
     may  not  give  optimal  performance.  The  source  must  reflect  the
     underlying  structure  of  the  system,  if  efficiency  is  to  be  a
     programming consideration.

     The primitive operations are GET, PUT and SEEK; the various operations
     such  as  write  and  readrn  are  mapped  into  sequences  of   these
     primitives.  Programmers interested in reducing I/O overhead are urged
     to read carefully the definitions of the  typed  file  operations,  as
     presented in Section 14.4 of the Report.


     4.4 -- Binary Files

     The  binary  file  implementation  is  very  simple; the TENIO package
     provides entries which perform the exact functions required by  PASCAL
     I/O.  Maintenance  of  CURSOR  and  EOF  are the main functions of the
     runtime.

     As discussed in Section 4.3 above, the mechanism underlying binary I/O
     works  in  blocks  of  128  words.  Knowledge  of  this  structure can
     increase program performance.  Notice that since CURSOR is  one-based,
     block boundaries are 1, 129, 257, etc.  Therefore, an operation like:

          readrn (f, 257, x:128);

     is very efficient, since it gets a block starting on a block boundary.
     Also, as stated above, single large operations are more efficient than
     several  smaller  ones  to transfer the same amount of data.  Finally,
     binary I/O is not implemented using a  buffer  of  type  MACHINE_WORD,
     although  the  binary  file  model  uses this concept.  The operations
     readrn and writern do not perform any  extra  I/O  to  fill  the  file
     buffer, since there is none.

     The  primitive  entries  are  read  and write, which move an arbitrary
     number of words to or from an arbitrary memory location from or to the
     current CURSOR position; and SEEK for setting CURSOR.









                                    TYM-PASCAL PDP-10 Programmer's Guide/13
                                                          February 25, 1980


     4.5 -- I/O Errors

     Error codes from TOPS-10 are returned via EXTSTATUS whenever possible.
     On file association, the error IO_OPNF is accompanied by an  EXTSTATUS
     value  returned  by  the LOOKUP or ENTER operator.  On sudden input or
     output failure, the EXTSTATUS value is taken from the  buffer  control
     block for textfiles, or from TENIO for other files.

     The  association  failure  codes  are  given  in the DEC Monitor Calls
     manual, Appendix E.  For transfer failures, the file status  bits  are
     returned for text files.


     4.6 -- PRESERVE Option

     For  non-text files, the PRESERVE option on REWRITE does not empty the
     file, and leaves CURSOR equal to EXTENT  +  1.  Therefore,  subsequent
     write  operations  append to the previous contents of the file with no
     intervening  blank  records.  An  UPDATE  operation,  in  addition  to
     permitting  input and also preserving the file's contents, sets CURSOR
     equal to 1.

     Textfiles can also be rewritten  with  the  PRESERVE  option.  Because
     zero  bytes  are  ignored  in  text files, however, there is no way to
     identify the last character in the file.  Subsequent write  operations
     therefore  start  with  the first byte of the block following the last
     block of the file; that last block is  padded  out  with  zero  words.
     This  makes  no  difference  as far as the contents of the textfile is
     concerned, but is a waste of disk space.  Copying  the  file  using  a
     standard  PASCAL textfile copy routine (see TYM-Pascal Report, Section
     14.3.2) will eliminate this dead space.





























   %a7a£