


                                               PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/1
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)




     Data Structures for PASCAL Files

     Input/output in PASCAL programs is performed through the mechanism  of
     file  variables.  Such a variable may be dynamically associated with a
     file or a device, and operations on the variable map  into  operations
     on  the  file  or  device.  In  addition, semantics may be defined for
     equality and inequality of file variables.  Finally,  the  dereference
     operation applied to a file variable accesses the file's component (if
     it has one), which is the current file element being transferred.

     In the current PASCAL implementation, file  variables  themselves  are
     file  blocks,  containing  control  information and a component of the
     file's base  type.  The  block  contains  addresses  used  in  certain
     operations,  as well as the address of the component as the first word
     (thus permitting the dereference operation to be implemented  easily).
     File  variables,  therefore,  cannot be assigned (a duplication of the
     control information would lead to total confusion, and indeed such  an
     operation is illegal) or relocated (the addresses within the block are
     absolute, and not  relative  to  the  block).  The  first  restriction
     somewhat  limits  the  flexibility  of file variables when compared to
     other types; the second causes file variables to fail when created  on
     the  virtual  heap,  and also strengthens the first restriction.  File
     variables contain a component of the base type, and thus are  not  the
     same size for different base types.  Finally, file variables cannot be
     a base type of another structure.

     The scheme envisioned for the new PASCAL implementation defines a file
     variable  to  be  a pointer.  Thus, a file may be a component of other
     structures.  A file variable points to a file block when active, which
     contains  information  about  the  file,  similar  to the current file
     blocks.  The new file blocks, however, are not allocated on the  heap,
     but  rather  in  a  special  file  block area at the top of the stack,
     similar to the allocation of ring headers and buffers by  the  current
     system.  File  blocks  do not move until the file associated with them
     is CLOSEd or otherwise released.  This implies that absolute addresses
     may  be used within such blocks (a file variable may be created on the
     heap, but when it is opened, its file block will be in the  FBA),  and
     that  the maximum number of file blocks needed at any time is equal to
     the maximum number of channels available  to  the  user  program.  The
     first  word  of  the  file  block  will  still  be  the address of the
     component; since the component will be part of the file  block,  there
     is  no  relocation  problem.  When  a  file  variable  is  first  used
     (hopefully  through  one  of  the  initializing  operations  discussed
     later),  it  is  allocated  a  file  block within the FBA.  During the
     course of subsequent operations, the value of the file  variable  does
     not  change.  Finally,  when  the  file  is CLOSEd, the FBA storage is
     released and recycled.  The  similarity  between  file  variables  and
     pointers  is  deliberate,  and provides a semantication for assignment
     and equality that is both simple and familiar.  The  assignment  of  a
     file  variable  sets the value of the pointer, in the same manner that
     two pointers may point to  the  same  record.  In  general,  two  file









                                               PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/2
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


     variables  are  equal  only after an assignment (see the discussion on
     terminal I/O for an exception!), are undefined until initialized,  and
     may  be  left  dangling by careless programmers.  These statements are
     true for pointers, and indeed, an operation on a file variable (except
     OPEN and CLOSE) is an operation on its dereferenced variable.

     The  need for a special dynamic storage area (the FBA) for file blocks
     should be justified, since the PASCAL runtime  system  already  has  a
     fairly   sophisticated  storage  allocation  and  reclamation  system.
     First, static storage could be used, associating  a  file  block  with
     each  file  identifier.  This  forces some of the file blocks to be on
     the heap (see below).  Also, this leads to complications with dangling
     pointers which are difficult to resolve, to wit:

          var f,g: text;
          . . .
          open (f, 'GRIZZL.WAX');
          g := f;                       (* f, g point to f's block *)
          open (f, 'KARMA.BAD');        (* f can't use its own block *)
                                        (* because g is using it *)

     A  second  alternative is to use heap storage.  This leads to problems
     with unsuspecting users destroying the I/O system's  data  structures.
     For  example,  a  user  could  perform  a  MARK  before the I/O system
     allocates the file block, and the subsequent RELEASE would destroy the
     block.  Also,  since  records on the virtual heap are relocatable, the
     file system must use either relative addressing or  virtual  addresses
     when  in  virtual  mode.  The  first  alternative  is  a  pain, but is
     tenable.  The second requires two separate copies of the  I/O  system,
     one  which  dereferences  virtual pointers to access its data, and the
     other which performs  normal  addressing.  Neither  solution  is  very
     attractive.

     In  the  current  I/O  system,  a portion of the file block storage is
     allocated in an area similar to the proposed FBA.  This area  contains
     the  ring  headers,  whose  addresses  the  operating system remembers
     across calls.  Thus,  they  cannot  be  relocatable.  By  placing  the
     entire  file  block in such an area, the problem with the ring headers
     is alleviated by making them part of the file block, while  the  above
     mentioned problems are eliminated if the file block is neither virtual
     nor relocatable.  Using such a  system  involves  the  creation  of  a
     storage manager for the secreted stack space (which hopefully need not
     be too complicated), and a dynamic chain fixer (to protect  the  space
     stolen  at the top from being pushed down onto).  The allocator in the
     current runtime need allocate only fixed size blocks (for ring headers
     and  buffers),  and  thus  is primitive.  Since file components are of
     arbitrary size, the new manager must be a little  more  sophisticated.
     This  is  balanced by the reduced static storage requirements for file
     variables.

     Consistent with the other runtime routines, the I/O routines will  get
     their  arguments  via ARG words following their call.  A file argument
     is specified by an ARG word whose effective address is the address  of









                                               PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/3
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


     the file block for the operation.  Thus,

          MOVEI  ac,@0(TOP)

     should suffice to load the file block address in ac.

     The  contents  of  a  file  block  should  remain unknown to the other
     runtime routines.  Each file block will have at  least  the  following
     words:

        0        0,,addr(component)   ;thus, f^ is a double dereference
        1        backlink,,forelink   ;all file blocks are chained
        2        0,,channel           ;effective addr is ch. #
        3        eof                  ;also has eoln and eopage for text
        4        cursor               ;maintained for all files
        5        error,,error         ;nonfatal and fatal error codes
        6        size                 ;component size if relevant
        7        instr                ;use XCT to dump/get a bufferload
        10       status               ;various bits
        11       linenr               ;p.a.[1..5] of char
        12       filename             ;filename in sixbit
        13       filext               ;file extension
        14       ?,,addr(buffer)-2    ;first word of ring header
        15       byte pointer         ;second
        16       byte counter         ;third
        17       ?                    ;fourth
        20       errors               ;first word of buffer header
        21       size,,addr(buffer)-2 ;link to next buffer (only one)
        22       0,,count             ;size of buffer
        23       buffer               ;file/device/mode dependent
        . . .                         ;  length
        23+count component            ;may be arbitrarily long


     Word  10  above  (status)  contains,  among  other  things, the set of
     IO_OPTIONS and the file type bits given on the OPEN call (see  below).
     Thus,   validity   of  operations  may  be  determined.  Some  of  the
     information is not needed for certain modes or types of files, and the
     system  will  not  allocate  it.  Specifically,  the component and the
     buffer will be identical for files of component size  128  words,  and
     the  ring  header  and  buffer  header will not be included for binary
     files using the TENIO package.


     File operations

     The first operation  on  any  file  variable  should  be  one  of  the
     following  initializing  operations:  OPEN, REWRITE, RESET, or UPDATE.
     These  operations  are  mapped  onto  the  following  set  of  runtime
     routines:   <OPEN.>  initializes  a  text  file  for  input,  <REWRT.>
     initializes a text file for output, <RESET.> performs an OPEN followed
     by   a  GET  (standard  function  RESET)  on  a  text  file,  <OPNTP.>
     initializes a typed non-text file, and <OPNBN.> a binary  file  ("file









                                               PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/4
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


     of  *").  The  ARG list for each of the five routines is the same, and
     is listed below:

          pushj     <routine>
            ARG     bits,component-length
            ARG     0,addr(bp)
            ARG     0,length-of-name
            ARG     0,addr(optionset)

     where bp is a byte pointer to the file name to use such that ILDB gets
     the  first  character,  and  bits  define additional attributes of the
     file.  The two lengths are given as immediate operands.  The AC  field
     of  the  first  operand  is  set  as  follows:  bits 0 and 1, used for
     <OPNTP.> and <OPNBN.>, are set to allow input and output respectively.
     For  all  operations, bit 2 is set if the file is packed, and bit 3 is
     set to indicate that the file name is an internal  descriptor  of  the
     file  variable, and should be translated into a suitable external file
     name  before  attempting  to  open  the  file.  Notice  that   certain
     combinations  of  the  arguments  will  never occur (e.g., a component
     length for a binary file), but it is assumed  that  the  compiler  has
     emitted  only  correct  calls.  All routines return the address of the
     new file block in AC1.

     In summary, there are five initializing entry points:

          OPEN.         input, no GET
          REWRT.        output
          RESET.        input and GET
          OPNTP.        open typed non-text file
          OPNBN.        open binary file

     followed by four words of arguments.

     In order to accomodate the variations on opening files  with  OPEN  or
     RESET,  the  following convention is specified.  The standard function
     OPEN is used only for text files, providing a "hook"  for  interactive
     terminal  I/O.  The  standard  functions  RESET and UPDATE used with a
     typed file  require  the  loading  of  the  file  component.  This  is
     performed by <RESET.> and <OPNTP.> respectively.

     The  GET  and PUT operations are defined for all but binary files, and
     take only a file variable argument as defined above.  The entry points
     are  <GET.>  and <PUT.> for typed files, and <GETCH.> and <PUTCH.> for
     text files.  In  addition,  the  entries  <GETCR.>  and  <PUTCR.>  are
     defined  for text files remembered from the previous GET, PUT, RD., or
     WR. operation.  The READ and  WRITE  operations  are  defined  in  the
     standard  language  in  terms of assignment and GET/PUT.  The compiler
     emits these assignments and calls explicitly in order to gain  context
     for the assignment to the buffer.

     The  SEEK  operation  is  defined  for all but text files, and has two
     ARGS; the first is a file block address, the second is the address  of
     an  integer-compatible  value  to  seek.  The  entry point is <SEEK.>.









                                               PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/5
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


     EXTENT   takes   a   file   variable   argument,   and   returns    an
     integer-compatible  value in AC1.  The size of the file's base type is
     examined, and the integer returned is in  units  of  the  base  type's
     size,  or in words if the file is binary.  The entry point <FILSZ.> is
     defined.  CURSOR is allocated a word within the file block, and may be
     accessed  directly  by  the compiled code.  The function BREAK takes a
     file variable, and is  defined  as  <BREAK.>.  The  PAGE  function  is
     implemented  as the entry point <PAGE.>, taking a file block argument.
     For binary files, the READ and WRITE operations are implemented as the
     entry  points  <RDBIN.>  and <WRBIN.>, which take three arguments -- a
     file block, a core address from/to which to write/read, and  a  length
     in  words.  To  assist  in the use of this function, a function EXTENT
     (ptr) has been defined, which returns the size in words of a record at
     "the  end"  of ptr.  EXTENT works only with pointers to records in the
     dynamic memory area; inasmuch as pointers to other  kinds  of  records
     cannot  be  formed "naturally" and must be coerced, no attempt is made
     to define EXTENT of a static record, or of a subrecord  of  a  dynamic
     record.  The  first case is detectable, and will trap according to the
     implementation; the second case is not, and its result are not defined
     by any implementation.

     Image  I/O  to  text files is performed by two routines.  <RDIMG.> and
     <WRIMG.> correspond to the GET8 and PUT8  predefined  functions.  Each
     entry point takes two ARG words; the effective address of the first is
     the address of the file block, and the effective address of the second
     is  the  address  of  the  integer  variable  to  read  or write.  The
     associated file must have been opened with the IMAGE option.

     To close a file, two operations are defined.  CLOSE performs a  normal
     close,   while  SCRATCH  deletes  the  file  if  possible.  These  are
     implemented as two entries, <CLOSE.> and  <CLOSD.>,  taking  a  single
     file  variable descriptor.  The function EMPTY deletes the contents of
     a file open for output (at least), setting  eof  true  and  CURSOR  to
     zero.  EMPTY  is  implemented as the entry <EMPTX.> for text files and
     <EMPTY.> for typed and binary files.  Each entry points takes a single
     file  variable  descriptor.  Finally,  the CLOSE function with no file
     variable argument is implemented <CLOSA.>, taking no arguments,  which
     closes all open files.

     Formatted  I/O  with  text files is very general, having a total of 19
     routines for all variable-text conversions.  Variants of the  routines
     handle  conversions  for  specific  types.  The  generic  forms of the
     routines are <RD.ttf> and <WR.ttf>, where tt designates the target  of
     the  operation  (defined  below),  and  f designates the format of the
     target.  In this discussion, the following terms are used:  the  datum
     of  a  formatted  I/O operation is the base variable of the item being
     read, written, parsed from text, or translated to text.  This  may  be
     an entity of any PASCAL atomic type, including temporary variables and
     constants generated by the compiler.  The target of the  operation  is
     the  file  or  string  variable  named  as  the first parameter of the
     operation.  Each operation has a target  descriptor  as  an  argument,
     either  stored  or  explicit,  which identifies the target variable or
     expression.









                                               PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/6
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


     The first ARG word following a  call  to  one  of  the  formatted  I/O
     routines  is an optional target descriptor, described for each variant
     below.  Next is a required datum descriptor, whose  interpretation  is
     dependent  upon  its  AC  bits,  as  described below.  After the datum
     descriptor is an optional set of  format  descriptors,  explained  for
     each  datum type below.  If a format descriptor is given, the AC field
     specifies special processing.  Notice that the  presence  of  optional
     arguments  is  detected  by the presence of a zero opcode field in the
     words following the return  address.  The  first  two  bits  are  type
     dependent;  for  all  types, bit 2 is set to specify non-minimal field
     width processing (the default is minimum), and bit 3 is set to specify
     left   justification,  clear  to  specify  right  justification.  Text  processing code is grouped into modules with entries named below, with
     a  set of error routine calls to satisfy any unresolved requests.  The
     high order bit of the AC field of  the  datum  descriptor  is  set  to
     indicate  the  presence of an additional arg immediately following it,
     whose EA is the address of a block  containing  the  lower  and  upper
     bounds  respectively  of  the subrange being read into.  This block is
     four words long for double precision real reads, and  two  words  long
     for single real and integer.  The rightmost three bits of the AC field
     of the datum descriptor are used to describe the  type  of  datum  and
     format descriptors, as follows:

     000 - integer.  The  effective  address of the datum descriptor is
           the address of the  integer  datum  to  read  or  write.  If
           present,  a  format  descriptor gives the field width as its
           effective  address,  with  bit  0  set  to   specify   octal
           conversion,  or bit 1 set to specify hexadecimal conversion.
           The symbol <INT.R> must be requested for integer reads,  and
           <INT.W> for writes.

     001 - single  precision  real.  The effective address of the datum
           descriptor is the  address  of  the  single  precision  real
           number  which  is  the  datum.  On input, an optional format
           descriptor gives the field width as its  effective  address.
           On  output,  the  high  order  bits  of  the AC field of the
           required first format descriptor comprise a two bit  integer
           specifying  the  output  format, as follows.  Zero indicates
           the default G format ("x"); the EA of the format  descriptor
           gives  the precision of the expression.  One indicates the E
           format ("x:10"); the second format descriptor gives the user
           specified  field  width,  and  the  EA  of  the first format
           descriptor is not normally  used.  Two  indicates  F  format
           ("x:10:3"); the first format descriptor gives the fractional
           field width instead of the precision, while the second gives
           the   field   width.   Three  indicates  explicit  E  format
           ("x:10:3:E"); the first format descriptor gives the explicit
           precision,  while  the  second  gives  the field width.  The
           symbol <REAL.R>  must  be  requested  for  real  reads,  and
           <REAL.W> for real writes.

     010 - double precision real.  The arguments are identical to those
           for single precision real, except  that  the  datum  is  two









                                               PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/7
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


           words in length.

     011 - "X"  format  strings.  The  datum descriptor is two words in
           length; the effective  address  of  the  first  ARG  is  the
           address  of  a  byte pointer to the string or substring, and
           the effective address of the second ARG  is  the  length.  A
           single  format descriptor, whose effective address gives the
           field width,  is  optional.  The  symbol  <XSTR.R>  must  be
           requested  for "X" format reads, and <XSTR.W> for "X" format
           writes.

     100 - "F" format strings.  The datum descriptor is  two  words  in
           length;  the  effective  address  of  the  first  ARG is the
           address of the first word of the fixed  length  string,  and
           the  effective  address  of the second ARG is the length.  A
           single format descriptor, whose effective address gives  the
           field  width,  is  optional.  The  symbol  <FSTR.R>  must be
           requested for "F" format reads, and <FSTR.W> for "F"  format
           writes.

     101 - "C"  format  strings.  The datum descriptor is one ARG word,
           whose effective  address  is  the  address  of  a  character
           variable.   A  single  format  descriptor,  whose  effective
           address gives the  field  width,  is  optional.  The  symbol
           <CSTR.R>  must  be  requested  for  "C"  format  reads,  and
           <CSTR.W> for "C" format writes.

     110 - string variables.  The datum descriptor is one or two  words
           in  length;  the  effective address of the first ARG word is
           the address of the  length  word  of  the  string,  and  the
           effective  address  of  the  second ARG word is the string's
           declared maximum length.  This form must be used for reading
           into  a  string  variable  (so  that the length may be set).
           This datum type is not used in WR. calls.  A  single  format
           descriptor,  whose  effective address gives the field width,
           is optional.  The symbol <STRV.R> must be requested  to  use
           this datum type.

     111 - boolean.  The  datum  descriptor  is  one  ARG  word,  whose
           effective address is the address of a  boolean  variable.  A
           single  format descriptor, whose effective address gives the
           field width, is optional.  This mode is used only on output.
           The symbol <BOOL.W> must be requested to use this mode.


     There  are  19  variants  on  the  <WR.>  and  <RD.> routines.  Unless
     specifically mentioned, each of the below variants has  both  a  <WR.>
     form  and  an  <RD.>  form.  The  first argument is an optional target
     descriptor, whose exact format is determined by the variant  used,  as
     described below:

     FDN - new  file  or  device.  The  target  descriptor  is  a  file
           variable  argument  as   described   above,   without   type









                                               PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/8
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


           information  (AC field zero).  It is a single ARG word whose
           effective address is the address of the  file  block  to  be
           used.

     FDR - remembered  file or device.  The target is a file or device;
           the address of the file block has  been  saved  by  the  I/O
           runtime  in  the  PASCAL  data  area from the previous call.
           There is no ARG word to describe the file argument.

     SVN - new string variable.  The target is a varying length  string
           variable.  The  argument  is  a single word, whose effective
           address is that of a two-word cell.  The first word  is  the
           address  of the length word of the target string; the second
           word is a cell which, in the WR. variant, is initialized  by
           the  inline  code  to  the  maximum  permissible  length  of
           translation.  The second argument is  (usually)  decremented
           for  each operation, such that the argument may be used as a
           countdown (number of positions remaining).  The WR. variant,
           used   for  PUTSTRING,  concatenates  the  translation,  and
           updates  the  length  word  of  the  string  variable.   Its
           starting  place is thus the <length> + 1 th character of the
           string, and the inline code  should  initialize  the  length
           word of the target string appropriately (usually zero).  The
           RD. variant is not implemented, and the  substring  form  is
           used.

     SVR - remembered  string variable.  The target is a varying length
           string variable.  The address of the  length  word  and  the
           location  of  the countdown cell have been stored by the I/O
           runtime from the previous call.  There are no ARG  words  to
           describe the target.

     SSN - new  substring.  The  target  is an arbitrary substring of a
           string (varying or fixed length).  The argument is a pointer
           to  a  two  word  cell  of  arguments.  The  first  argument
           contains a byte pointer which when incremented will point to
           the  first  character of the substring; the second word is a
           cell  containing  the  length  of  the  substring.  The  two
           argument cells are updated after the operation such that the
           byte  pointer,  when  incremented,  points  to  the  current
           character, and the length is a countdown word.

     SSR - remembered substring.  The target is an arbitrary substring.
           The address of the two cells discussed above are  remembered
           from the previous SSN or SSR call, and modified according to
           the operation.

     FSN - new fixed string.  The target is a fixed length string.  The
           argument is a pointer to a two-word cell.  The first word is
           a cell containing the address of the first word of the fixed
           length  string.  The  second  word  is a cell containing the
           length of the string.  The first argument is converted  into
           a  byte pointer which when incremented points to the current









                                               PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/9
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


           character; the length is used as  a  countdown  word.  Thus,
           the  FSR  variant  is  functionally  identical  to  the  SSR
           variant, since a byte pointer and countdown word are used in
           both.  Accordingly, there is no FSR variant.

     LNN - new  done  with  line.  The  target  is  a  file  or  device
           variable.  The  argument  is  an  explicit   file   variable
           descriptor.  This  routine  is  used to implement the READLN
           and WRITELN functions on  the  specified  file,  by  calling
           after the processing of the item list, if any.

     LNR - remembered  done  with line.  The target is a file or device
           variable.  There is no  explicit  argument,  and  the  saved
           address of the file or device variable is used.  The routine
           performs the same function as the LNN variant.

     DNN - new done.  The target is a fixed length string variable,  or
           an  arbitrary  substring of a fixed or varying length string
           variable.  The argument is a pointer to a two-word cell; the
           first  word  contains  a byte pointer which when incremented
           points to the first character to blank out; the second  word
           contains  the  address  of  a cell containing the countdown.
           This is called at the end of a  PUTSTRING  to  add  trailing
           blanks to the target of the PUTSTRING.  Only the WR. variant
           is provided.  It should be noted that this  routine  assumes
           that  one of the above calls has already been made, and that
           in the case of a packed array of char, the address has  been
           translated  into  a  byte pointer.  This requires that every
           PUTSTRING have at least one item.

     DNR - remembered  done.  The  target  is  a  fixed  length  string
           variable,  or  an  arbitrary substring of a fixed or varying
           length string variable.  The  argument  is  saved  from  the
           previous  call  to  any  of  the  substring and fixed length
           string routines, and performs the same function as  the  DNN
           variant.  Only the WR. variant is provided.

     The  intended  usage  of  the above variants is to use the "R" variant
     whenever possible.  Thus, a typical sequence would use the "N" form to
     process  the  first  item,  and the "R" form for the rest of the list.
     This  may  only  be  used  when  there  are  no  "side   effects"   --
     specifically,  the  arguments  composing  each  item  in  the list are
     processed after the previous item is complete.  If  any  routines  are
     called during this evaluation which may perform any formatted I/O (and
     thus stomp on the stored data), the item must be processed  using  the
     "N"  form.  This  is not a serious drawback if the compiler tracks the
     two words composing the "N" form arguments.  For example,  they  could
     be a pair of temps allocated in the local stack frame, whose addresses
     are given relative to the basis pointer whenever  needed.  They  could
     also  be  a  pair  of registers, if it is known that the registers are
     available during the course of  the  evaluation.  Finally,  if  it  is
     known  that  no other routines are called during the processing of the
     list, any temporary cell could be used to store the byte  pointer  and









                                              PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/10
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


     the  countdown,  and the compiler need not track them at all.  Perhaps
     an option could be added to this specification (such as  an  effective
     address  of  zero) to tell the I/O routines to use cells in the PASCAL
     data area.

     A few (correct) examples may further elucidate my ideas.

        putstring (substr (str, a, b), i: 10, x, 
                   substr (str2, a, b) );
        (* assume the substr pointers in EXP1 & EXP2,
           which are available for entire sequence *)

           pushj     wr.ssn         ;new substring
             ARG     0,EXP1         ;addr of two-word cell
             ARG     0,I            ;integer i
             ARG     0,12           ;decimal rt. just.,wid =10 dec
           pushj     wr.ssr         ;continue
             ARG     001,X          ;single prec. real X
             ARG     0,prec(X)      ;precision factor
           ...                      ;EXP3 & EXP4 get ptrs to substring
                                    ; assume EXP1 & EXP2 still good
           pushj     wr.ssr         ;remember
             ARG     011,EXP3       ;X format; addr (b.p.)
             ARG     0,0(EXP4)      ;immediate length
           pushj     wr.dnr         ;done with remembered substring

        (* notice that in above example, EXP1 & EXP2 could be replaced by
           5(16) and 6(16), or A and B, if registers were not available. *)


        read (f, i, a(i):6, q:z(i), q);
        (* assume array a is unpacked *)

           pushj     rd.fdn         ;new file or device
             ARG     0,@F           ;file F (assume LH of F zero)
             ARG     000,I          ;integer I
           hrre      EXP1,I         ;load index
           pushj     rd.fdr         ;remembered file or device
             ARG     000,-lb(EXP1)  ;lower bound hack, integer
             ARG     0,6            ;rt. just.,decimal, wid=6
           ...                      ;evaluate z(I) in EXP1
           pushj     rd.fdn         ;new file or device
             ARG     0,@F           ;actually the same old file
             ARG     001,q          ;single real q
             ARG     0,0(EXP1)      ;rt. just.,dec, wid=z(I)
           pushj     rd.fdr
             ARG     001,q          ;single real q, default format
             ARG     001,prec(q)

        (* caveat user if F modified within z! *)


        putstring (str, i:10, i: f(i), i:10);









                                              PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/11
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


        (* assume no registers are available for 
           computation -- use local stack frame *)

           movei     R1,STR         ;addr of string
           movem     R1,5(16)
           movei     R1,maxlen(STR) ;its allocated length
           movem     R1,6(16)       ;next temp on stack
           setzm     0,addr(STR)    ;set length word to zero
           pushj     wr.svn         ;new string variable
             ARG     0,5(16)        ;addr of two-word cell
             ARG     000,I          ;integer I
           ...                      ;evaluate F(I) in 3(16)
           pushj     wr.svn         ;knew that F did formatted I/O
             ARG     0,5(16)        ;same cells
             ARG     000,I          ;integer I
             ARG     0,@3(16)       ;hope ind. bit isn't set!!
           pushj     wr.svr         ;one more
             ARG     000,I          ;integer I
             ARG     0,10           ;rt. just, decimal, wid=10




     Terminal I/O

     In general, the job's controlling terminal, and any  other  attachable
     device,  is manipulated as a text file.  Any of the operations defined
     on a text file may be performed on the teletype.  In addition, several
     file variables may have been opened independently on the terminal, but
     all will point to the same file block.  In other words,

          open (f, 'TTY:');
          open (g, 'TTY:');
          open (tty);

     leaves the three file variables F, G, and TTY equal, and any operation
     performed   on   any   one   is   performed   on  all  simultaneously.
     Specifically, CLOSEing any of f, g, and tty  CLOSEs  all  of  them.  A
     common  practice  in  Tymshare's  PASCAL  utility  programs is to have
     output and input files separated by an equal sign, in the DEC  manner.
     Such  programs  typically  have  a processing section of code with the
     following statements as brackets:

          rewrite (foo, inputstring);
          . . .
          close (foo);

     Now, if inputstring is equal to  'TTY:'  from  user  input,  the  last
     statement  above  will  also  close the output side of the interactive
     terminal (usually leading to an unassigned channel error on  the  next
     input  prompt).  A  more  appropriate  final  statement  for the above
     example would be










                                              PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/12
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


          if foo <> ttyoutput then
            close (foo);

     assuming that ttyoutput has been rewritten.

     Several special functions are provided for  the  terminal  as  a  text
     file.  CLEAR,  implemented  as  the entry point <CLEAR.>, takes a file
     variable as parameter, and flushes out all  output  or  input  without
     looking   at   it.   In  other  words,  the  terminal  is  effectively
     reinitialized.  BREAK works on any text file, and  suspends  execution
     of  the  calling  program  until  all the output on the specified file
     variable has reached its file or device.  Finally, CURSOR,  when  used
     with a text file, returns the character count for the current line.


     Errors

     In  general,  two  classes  of errors are recognized by the PASCAL I/O
     system, which are best described as fatal errors and non-fatal errors.
     No  non-fatal  error will directly lead to program termination.  Fatal
     errors will cause program termination unless the file  or  device  has
     been  opened  with  the  OKERRS  option.  In  this case, the operation
     "completes" in the sense that  the  runtime  routine  returns  to  the
     program.  The  program  can then call the IO_STATUS routines to obtain
     information about the error, and to attempt to recover from the error.
     If any other operation on that file variable is attempted, the program
     terminates with the same error condition as if  OKERRS  had  not  been
     specified.

     Two  error query routines are available.  The IOSTATUS routine returns
     a scalar of type IO_STATUS,  which  is  listed  below.  The  EXTSTATUS
     routine  returns additional implementation-dependent information about
     the error if it is available.  IOSTATUS takes a  file  variable  as  a
     parameter,  and  returns  in  AC1  the  status  of  the last operation
     performed on that variable.  EXTSTATUS does not take a parameter,  and
     returns  extended status of the last operation performed by any of the
     I/O  routines  described  in  this  document.  The  integer-compatible
     argument  returned  from  EXTSTATUS  is  zero  to  indicate  either  a
     successful operation or the lack of any significant error information.
     The meanings of non-zero EXTSTATUS returns are defined by the specific
     implementation.  The runtime entry points for the status routines  are
     <IOSTA.> for IOSTATUS, taking a single ARG for the file block address,
     and <IOSTL.> if no argument was given to IOSTATUS  (see  below).  Both
     return  their  result  in  AC1.  EXTSTATUS is implemented as the entry
     point <EXTST.>, taking no arguments and returning its result in AC1.

     The following is a list of the error conditions detected  by  the  I/O
     system.  The  middle  column defines the class of the error -- "F" for
     fatal, "N" for non-fatal.  In addition,  "E"  signifies  that  further
     information  is  available  from  the IO_EXT_ERROR call.  Finally, "S"
     indicates that the error can occur  on  PUTSTRING  or  GETSTRING  (see
     below).










                                              PASCAL I/O Runtime Support/13
                                      May 13, 1979 (revised March 18, 1980)


        IO_OK                  last operation successful
        IO_NOVF      NS        arithmetic overflow on conversion
        IO_POVF      NS        PUTSTRING target length exceeded
        IO_DGIT      NS        digit not within integer base,
                               bad initial char seen
        IO_GOVF      NS        GETSTRING attempt to read past end of string

        IO_INTR      F         I/O system internal error
        IO_REWR      F         "rewrite required" (not open for output)
        IO_EOF       F         attempt to read beyond eof (count exceeded),
                               also reading output-only file
        IO_OUTF      FE        output failure (probably no disk space)
        IO_INPF      FE        input failure (probably invalid conversion)
        IO_SEEK      F         attempt to SEEK non-random file
        IO_ILLC      F         attempt to SEEK invalid cursor value
        IO_NEMP      FE        can't empty file
        IO_OPNF      FE        can't open file


     Formatting  errors  can  occur  during  the  PUTSTRING  and  GETSTRING
     operations.  There is no file variable associated with the  target  of
     such  operations,  so the IOSTATUS function called without a parameter
     returns  the  IO_STATUS  code  associated  with  the  last  formatting
     operation.  This  includes  formatted  I/O  from/to  text  files,  and
     PUTSTRING  and  GETSTRING  calls.  The  IO_POVF  error  (string  field
     exceeded) indicates that the maximum length associated with the target
     of a  PUTSTRING  has  been  exceeded.  Any  subsequent  items  in  the
     PUTSTRING  list  will  be evaluated but will not create any additional
     text within the target.  When GETSTRING  goes  past  the  end  of  the
     target  string,  the  IO_GOVF  error  is  returned,  and the item base
     variable not modified.

     It is important to realize that a call such as

          writeln (f, foo, ech, gonzo, wacko);

     is equivalent to five separate calls, to wit:

          write (f, foo);
          write (f, ech);
          write (f, gonzo);
          write (f, wacko);
          writeln (f);

     In fact, the code emitted for the two  forms  is  identical.  A  fatal
     error  occuring  within  the list will not be available to an IOSTATUS
     call after the statement.  Rather, the processing  of  the  next  item
     after the erroneous one will cause program termination, as if the item
     has occurred in its own procedure call (as in the second list above).











   ~@NÑ