				CP/11 UNIT STATUS
			       SECOND QUARTER, 1981

			       NATALIE SHUTTLEWORTH


MILESTONE TASKS

Total persondays scheduled, spent and remaining are shown on the Milestone
Report, attached.  What follows here is an explanation of uncompleted tasks
or exceptions to the Q2 Plan.

A.  TYMBASE/11 For 2020/TYMCARE

 1. The 24 terminal test was not performed because the hardware was not
    available.  We did run tests using 6 terminals with both an LSI-11/2
    and an LSI-11/23 CPU.  The needed cables and terminals should be avail-
    able within 4-6 weeks for stress testing with 24 terminals.

    Our testing indicated that the 11/23 processes data about twice as fast
    as the 11/2.  Also, if terminals are run at 9600 baud on a node and
    the synchronous link to Tymnet (or to another node) is also 9600 baud,
    the faster processor is needed due to timing problems in handling in-
    terrupts.

B.  COMPAK Testing

 1. Testing was completed early in July (after Q2 end).  A letter was sent to
    Uninet documenting the problems we discovered.  A copy of the problem
    report accompanies this report.
 
    The significant problems include:

	a) Only one Tymnet (T201) sync link works.
	b) Only two DDCMP (Link B) micronet sync links work, probably because
	   all sync links have equal priority.
	c) All ports, sync and async, have equal priority -- no way to give
	   sync links higher priority, which results in lower thruput.
	d) Resetting the Tymnet (T201) sync link causes the port to stop
	   sending.
	e) The bootstrap doesn't work.

    In addition, the source code for the 8086 was not sent on the tape from
    Nexilis, and needed documentation was not delivered (programmer's
    guide, installation guide, system reference).  Finally, not all needed
    artwork for manufacturing the board set in quantities was delivered (see
    attached letter from Frank Dragovits).


    I have sent no payments to Nexilis or Uninet for the Compak.  The bill is
    $10,000.

C.  LSI-11/23 Support using BDV11 Bootstrap

 1. The new PROM required for the BDV11 to work with either an LSI-11/2
    or an 11/23 has been burned and tested successfully.  This was done
    early in July (after Q2 end).

 2. Extra copies of the master PROM have not yet been made.

D. Tools and Documents

 4. The job of creating a Micronode/Micronet System Reference Manual
    has turned out to be more time-consuming, especially in real-time,
    than originally planned for.  Ishan has spent much time becoming
    familiar with the code in order to give the information to Caroline
    Rose who is creating the document.  Additionally, we have modified our
    implementation  strategy.

    We are now planning a phased approach, and the target for a phase I
    document delivery is September 30.  Phase I will provide an overview
    of the system and data structures and communications protocols and a
    detail of the Link H (Tymnet synchronous) and Link C (internodal
    parallel links) internals.  The next phase will include terminal
    handling and perhaps Link B (DDCMP, internodal synchronous) internals.

    Our new approach will provide the most needed documentation, which
    includes the Tymnet link, first;  however, the Tymnet link is also
    the most complex, so will require extra time to describe.

 5. This project was delayed due to lack of time and low priority.
    EPM (Tim) has been working with DEC to determine if they will provide
    their standard diagnostics on cassette tape or will give us access to
    their sources so we can move them to cassette tape.  Currently, DEC
    has said they will provide their standard diagnostics on standard
    paper tape only.  TMS has ordered paper tape readers for the 2020/TYMCARE
    systems and intends to use this method initially.

E.  RSX11M Host/BASE Debugging

 1. Ishan completed diagnosis of problems using our PDP-11/34, and fixed
    all bugs related to this initial diagnosis.  John Coons later installed
    his 11/34 on Bubbnet in VG3 using a MicroBase, and reported some new
    problems.  Of the now known bugs, only one remains unfixed.  So far,
    all problems have been in the Host Driver code (NTDRV) rather than in
    the MicroBase.  However, the way the NTDRV was written was such that
    some work done by it could have been done better inside the Node.

    Local terminals work fine.  The problems fixed mostly involved Tymnet
    terminals.  The remaining problem involves the aux-circuit implementation
    in RSX11M.  (Aux-circuits built from RSX11M actually look like terminal
    circuits to Tymnet;  i.e., they have passwords.  So there is no security
    problem in allowing their usage).

 2. In addition to debugging completed, the host-base protocol document
    was updated:  (DSSDOC:33)HOST.DOC.

F.  RSTS Host/Base Testing

 1. Testing was not completed because we could not get the RSTS/6C system
    installed and loaded properly from the old Nexilis tape we have;  it is
    an image for a system configured (hardware) differently from ours, and
    requires a RSTS systems wizard to get it working.  Ben Russel tried to get
    a RSTS/7 system tape and documentation on RSTS drivers, but has not
    yet delivered them.  Uninet promised to send a new RSTS/6C tape several
    months ago, but did not.

    Our new strategy is to hire a consultant for one day who knows both RSTS
    (versions 6C and 7) and VAX/VMS. (S)he would assist us in bringing up
    the system from the tape we have and also look at the network driver code
    and advise of the difficulty of upgrading from version 6C to 7 and from
    RSTS to VAX/VMS.  Ben Russell has agreed to pay for the consultant, if
    he receives the go-ahead to also request DSS to provide both a RSTS and
    a VAX/VMS Host/Base Interface to the Micronode.  This issue will be
    resolved in Q3.

 2. We determined that it is very feasible to update RSTS Host/Base support
    for version 7 from 6C from the inputs received from various DEC and
    DEC user RSTS wizards we contacted (at DECUS and elsewhere).  It is
    little or no effort.

G.  AUGMENT/F3 Support

    We considered the 2020/TYMCOM-X performance analysis higher priority
    than AUGMENT, so concentrated on the former.  Also, performance analysis
    on the AUGUST system is more complex, not as straight-forward as on the
    2020/TYMCOM-X system.  Also, we needed the new PROM for testing the 11/23.

H.  TYMSAT/11

 1. THis problem was not addressed due to lack of time, low priority, and
    lack of pressing requirement for a Micro-Tymsat.  The Mini-Engine will
    be used as an FEX replacement instead of the Micro-Tymsat.

NON-MILESTONE ACTIVITIES

A.  Support Activities

 1. Little AUGMENT support was necessary this Quarter (outside performance
    analysis project).

 2. Some work was done on the COMPAK evaluation.  TYMCARE support took
    precedence in Q2.  However, we learned in June that Nexilis, Inc., is
    to be dissolved on August 1.  So this project has gone critical if we are
    to receive any problem resolutions, etc., from Nexilis.

    Westlake did evaluate the engineering artwork and documentation from
    Nexilis and reported what was missing (see attached memo from Frank
    Dragovits).  We ran several tests and ran into problems, but failed to
    report them in writing to Nexilis.  Dennis reported problems verbally
    by telephone to Nexilis, but got no response.

    Early in July we re-ran several tests and completed testing sufficiently
    to identify several significant problems.  These have been reported in
    writing to Nexilis (Bruce Nevins).

    Our feeling is that is it still useful and feasible to pursue manufacture
    of the board, but that several of the problems should be resolved first.

 3. Low priority item -- we still intend to set up a Beta test Tymsat after
    the newest round of QA.  Early in July (not in Q2) we began QA on the
    MicroBase/2020, and plan to update the Tymsat specification and retest
    following completion of the Base testing.

 4. Low priority item - was not addressed.

 5. A method was determined but not implemented.

B.  Training Activities

 1. All Section members attended a special 2.5 day AUGMENT training class.

 2. Dennis worked with both Ishan and Gazel to assist them in learning
    more about the Micronode.  Gazel spent more than 50% of her time in
    training activities, reviewing code and documents, learning to generate
    node images and configure hardware.  Ishan attended a three-day networking
    seminar taught by Stuart Wecker (author of DECNET), formerly of DEC.

C.  Research Activities

 1. Dennis and Gazel and I all spent time learning about PABX technology.

 2. Gazel did some research on how to interface to IBM hosts, videotext
    terminal support, and the Dynatax/OCR project.  We need to know more.

D.  Administrative

 2. Configuration changes are generally on-going, done whenever we need to
    test something new or add user(s) to Micronet.

 3. The Dynasty host was not yet installed on Bubbnet.  It was unavailable
    most of the Quarter, due to problems with the disc.
   