				Q4 STATUS REPORT
			  DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS SECTION

			      NATALIE SHUTTLEWORTH


DATE:	20 January, 1982
TO:	Ken J. Jones				COPIES: Distribution
FROM:	Natalie Shuttleworth


The Q4 computed milestone data accompanies this report.  Attachments are
the TCOG and CP/11 Unit Status Reports.  Here is a summary of DSS
activities and project status for Q4/81.

I.  CP/11 UNIT (Dennis E., Gazel T., Ishan W.) -- managed by Natalie S.

    Gazel Tan was promoted to Unit Manager effective 1 December.
    She began training for this role last Quarter and increased her
    administrative activities this Quarter.  Dennis is still Technical
    Project Leader for MicroBase/11 Development.  

    Dennis concentrated on MPP/11 development this Quarter, especially
    debugging and enhancing the COMPAK.  Gazel and Ishan converted the
    RSTS v.6C Host/Base interface to work for RSTS v.7.  Ishan debugged
    the RSX11M Host/Base Interface and QA-tested the Micro-TYMSAT/11.
    Also, Ishan and Caroline Rose completed and published the first
    version of the Micronode/11 System Reference Manual!  Finally, work
    began on the VAX/VMS Host/Base project, but was delayed by requestor.



 A. Milestone Projects Completed (High to low priority):

    1.  Low-Cost Micronode - MPP/11 Development
	- Evaluation, Performance Analysis of COMPAK board
	- Fix 8086 code so COMPAK works correctly with SIO;
	  also, add hooks for DMA implementation later.
	- Test DPV-11 as DUV-11 replacement  -- successful
	  (DPV-11 is smaller, cheaper, runs faster)

    2.  RSTS v.7 Host/Base Interface
	- Conversion to RSTS v.7 from v.6C
	- Installation, on-site testing
	  -- on-site testing delayed by IBIS Group, due to installation
	     of new PDP-11/70 at Valley Forge
	  -- ASCII terminals tested using DSS PDP-11/34 (VG2-B lab)

    3.  TYMSAT/11 QA -- testing performed by Ishan and
	  problems documented (attachment)

    4.  Micronode/11 Internals Reference Manual, Phase I
	- Published; installed in DSSDOC:33 as CP11IS.DOC
	- Covers Overview (Basics), Link C (Parallel), Link H (T-201)

    5.  Re-write PROM-burning utilities to support DATA-I/O PROM burner

    6.  VAX/VMS Host/Base Interface:  Feasibility Study, Document

    7.  RSX-11M Host/Base Interface
	- Aux-circuit support (in node)
	- Aux-circuit support (in host)
Page 2

 B. Milestone Tasks Not Completed

    1.  Micronode/11 performance analysis/tuning  -- begun, ongoing

    2.  TYMSAT/11 QA by TYMNET  -- QA Manager left TYMNET;  we
	  did own testing, identified and documented problems

    3.  Low-cost Micronode:  Evaluate Falcon board computer
	- Found board has conflicts in addressing scheme with our
	  node code device addresses;  consulted with DEC -- they
	  are sending solution for changing Falcon's mem addresses.
	  Plan to modify the board and test next Quarter (Q1/82).

    4.  RSTS v.7 Host/Base Interface:  On-site testing on Valley Forge
	  11/70;  test IBIS application -- rescheduled by IBIS group
	  for Jan/82.  Delays outside DSS control.

    5.  X.25 Test/Debug
	- Gain familiarity with X.25 protocol:  Ishan attended a three-day
	  seminar on X.25, X.28, X.29, X.75, in Santa Clara
	- Learn code for Links E and G in Micronode code:  Ishan began
	  study, needs more work

    6.  GENNOD improvements to support TYMSAT's:  project to
	  make tool more general, support more flexibility in configurations,
	  was begun:  Functional Spec created 

 C. Required Unscheduled Tasks Completed

    1.  Micronetwork Presentation to DND -- 9.5 Persondays

    2.  MPP/11 Functional Specification created

 D. Support Activities Performed (High to Low Priority)

    1.  TYMCOM-X/2020/Fn, AUGMENT/F3 support -- 7 persondays
	- MicroBase/11 is now stable;  support activities have
	  decreased.  Work is beginning on planning for the F4.

    2.  RSX-11M, RSTS Host/Base Support: 13 Persondays
	- A new bug was fixed in the interface, enabling aux-
	  circuits to work properly.  The RSTS v.7 interface
	  was installed and tested on our Lab 11/34.  Several tests
	  were run to QA the interface to both operating systems.
	  Testing of the IBIS application was begun.

    3.  Micronode/11 operations - configuration and loading of nodes,
	diagnosing and trouble shooting -- 14.5 Persondays
	- A committment was obtained from Bob Tomasi and Rod
	  Hoffman of Tymnet to takeover operational responsibility
	  for MicroBase/11's that are on public TYMNET.  Gazel must
	  create or update some pertinent documentation for them
	  and schedule training.  Also, we want to improve GENNOD
	  before training the TYMNET supporters - planned for Q1/82.
Page 3

    4.  Beta Test Dual Sync Links at TRW:  a second
	  symc (T201) line was installed at TRW by Dennis in December.

    5.  Beta Test Micro-TYMSAT/11's 
	- 3 users from ISD (TTMS) were installed on a Micro-Concentrator
	  in the VG2-B Lab Micronetwork.  They are using the micronode
	  to do their daily work, through Bubbnet.
	- Two micronode/11's are still installed in NY and SF as part of
	  the CARAVAN experiment.  Extent of usage is unknown.

    6.  Sligos/Matra experiment
	- A Micro-TYMSAT/11 was ordered and installed by Sligos and
	  we have been working with them via electronic mail to get
	  it working.  A few errors in the configuration document were
	  discovered.  They finally got it working in January (82).

	- Their first TYMSAT/11 includes a watchdog timer and an
	  extra 32KB RAM (in addition to 32KB on the MXV11).  We sent
	  them our custom PROM for the MXV11 and watchdog timers --
	  actually we went two each, since they intend to bring up a
	  second TYMSAT/11 and interlink the two, for testing.

	- They are first testing with a T201 link to TYMNET.  Next,
	  they want to test X.25.

 E.  Training Activities -- 16 persondays

    1.  VAX/VMS Operating System
	- Internals Class (5 days, Santa Clara DEC) -- GT,IW
	- Device Driver Building Seminar (1 day, pre-DECUS) -- GT,IW

    2.  X.25 Seminar -- 3 days, IW

 F.  Research - Micronode Improvements:  3 Persondays

 G.  Administrative And Time-Off

    1.  Meetings, reporting, project management -- 20.5 Persondays

    2.  MicroNet configuration changes for testing, support -- 1 Day

    3.  Vacation (around Christmas) -- 10 Persondays
	-- Gazel and Ishan each carried over some vacation into 1982,
	in order to complete projects this Quarter (RSTS, RSX11M, VAX).

    4.  DECUS symposium -- Gazel and Natalie attended () P-Days)

    5.  Preparation for CP/11 Unit move to Building D (DND) -- 3 P-Days
Page 4

 H.  Significant Activities Scheduled but Not Begun

    Several additional activities had been planned in the summer
    when we thought we would expand the Unit by at least one RFP.
    Since the RFP was cancelled, these activities were not begun:

	- Phase II of MicroNet/11 System Internals Reference Manual
	- Micronode Diagnostics Study
	- ERS for VAX/VMS Host/Base -- this was delayed by a joint
	  decision of INSD (IBIS Marketing) and DND (Homer).

II. TCOG UNIT (Paul Crable, Gregory Strockbine -- managed by Janet Chin)

    Paul joined the Unit in November and Gregory in December.  Efforts
    are being concentrated on the SYNERGY development project.  Janet
    is still active in ANSI and ISO graphics standards committees and as
    a consulting resource in computer graphics for Tymshare.

    Janet aided EPM in selecting a graphics terminal vendor, ID systems,
    with whom we are now negotiating for graphics terminals for our
    product line.  EPM is soliciting projections from Tymshare groups
    for numbers of graphics terminals wanted in 1982. They are also
    considering a Datamedia terminal with a DEC engineering board,
    but are 90% in favor of the ID Systems line.  We expect color
    graphics terminals available by Q2/82.

    Janet published a GRAPHICS/PP design objectives and project proposal
    document, and the first draft of the SYNERGY Project Plan.  The
    latter is based on the SLIC Guidelines and can be used as a model.

    Paul is now responsible for PTC, as well as (starting January '82)
    DISSPLA and TELAGRAF technical support. Gregory is taking over
    DI3000 and GRAFMAKER technical support in January, 1982.

 A. Milestone Projects Completed

    1.  SCRIPT/PP Proposal (renamed GRAPHICS/PP Proposal)

    2.  SYNERGY Project
	- Project Plan created, following SLIC Guidelines
	- Skeleton ERS (Functional Spec) created

    3.  PECS Schedule for TCOG for 1982


 B.  Milestone Tasks Not Completed

    1.  SYNERGY ERS:  delayed by customers -- awaiting decision
	whether to interface to EXPRESS or FOCUS for pilot project.

 C.  Other Tasks Accomplished -- se janet Chin's report (attached)
Page 5

III. Natalie's Activities (Other than DSS and CP/11 Management)

 A.  Micronode/11 Projects

    1.  BPO - followed up on potential sale of micro-concentrators;
	they have made no new decisions.  We have a European competitor
	with an offering similar to our micronode with more functionality.
    2.  Sligos/Matra liason:  continued as liason to Sligos in bringing
	up two micro-concentrators in their Lab for testing and demo to
	Matra.  Began phasing project over to Gazel.

    3.  MDS EXPRESS Engine
	- met with Lazlo, Ken, Janet, Charles from Tymshare and 5
	  representatives from MDS for 3 days in Carmel for brain-
	  storming session.  Developed idea of EXPRESS Engine with
	  local network.  Generated a document of requirements vs.
	  current restrictions in Tymnet offerings.
	- met with Terry Culligan of MDS again in December to clarify
	  MDS requirements for frontends to their in-house machines as
	  well as for the EXPRESS Engine.

    4.  Briefed Homer on BPO, Sligos, and MDS projects, with intent
	to turn over responsibility to him with CP/11 Unit in January.


 B.  Management, Training

    1.  Attended Tymshare Manager's Class, Nov 16 - 20.

    2.  Attended 4 days of DECUS in Los Angeles.

    3.  Worked with CP/11 Members to assist them in transitioning
	from CTG to DND.  Reviewed, promoted and trained Gazel .

    4.  Prepared 1982 Budget for DSS (TCOG and Special Projects only).

    5.  Worked with other managers to re-allocate equipment to
	proper cost codes for Mini-Micro, CP/11 and TYMCOM-X/XX.

    5.  Accepted position with Tymnet as Western Regional Technical
	Manager for Private Networks.  Began reviewing Tymnet
	documents such as NETSPEC, PROBE, and discussions with new
	team members re: private net support strategy.

	Attended private net sales presentation one day in Santa
	Clara Tymnet office, by Jim Mullen.

    6.  Prepared materials for and participated in (led) CP/11
	Presentation to DND  - included chart of projects scheduled
	for 1981 and early 1982 for CP/11 Unit, and other statistical
	data showing current micronode/11 installations.

    7.  Met with Bob Tomasi and obtained committment from Tymnet to
	assume responsibility for operation of micronode/11's on
  	public Tymnet.

    8.  Met with Denny White to review current status, capabilities,
	and documentation of Micrnode/11 (includes MicroBase/11 as
	well as Micro-Concentrator/11 and Micronetworks).  Distributed
	appropriate documents to Tymnet Marketing and Sales Managers.
  