To:  Karen, Marian, Stuart, Linda, Francoise, Steve, Ed & Pat,
     Suzanne, Jim, Karen & Norman, Frosty, Patty, Arleen, Jackie,
     Paul & Jackie, Naomi, Sandy, Kevin, and Jim,

    At one time or another, I promised you all a letter describing
my trip out to California.  Well, Voila!  Here it is (finally).
Actually it's been written for awhile, but I hadn't mailed it.


    This story has at least four different beginnings, each depending
upon how detailed the explanation should be.  For the general audience,
however I will begin only with the "events" which happenned and leave
"most" of the reasoning out of it.

    In the beginning, there was darkness ...

			[No No!  That's too far back!]

    During the summer of 1980, it was suggested that I had been working
much too hard, and that I should try taking an extended vacation.  Well,
since I had started working in 1970, I had never taken a "real" vacation.
Sure, I had a week off, or even my entire freshman year in college, when
I wasn't really "working", but what's in a vacation?  Generally, just a
short time to catch up on this thing called "sleep" which everyone talks
about and some time to get things done at home.

    No no! Not that kind of "vacation", but one where you "go" somewhere,
relax, play tourist and put up with travelling hassels, etc., that kind
of vacation, far away from anything that even remotely looks like work.

    Well, says I, "this" is "work"?  I enjoy doing "this"!  That other
stuff is "WORK"!  Well, ok, I'll look into it, but I won't promise
anything.  Later that month, Steve asks if maybe I'd like to come back
to Arizona with him and spend a couple of weeks away from Washington.  I
talked to my boss & to Steve about the time frame and how it would
impact the college schedule, etc., and fine, all settled!  I was going
to spend almost an entire month away from the office.  Wheeeee!

    Now!  Everyone knows me.  The person who spends 320% of his "free"
time hacking away (hacking is a computerish term for wasting time
looking at or writing a moderately useless program) on some program or
other.  It is difficult, (probably impossible) for most of you to even
imagine me away from my terminal for more than a few days (hours even!).
So, "we" (meaning: "I") tell everyone that "Steve has a terminal.  I will
keep in touch, and will be doing some hacking while I'm away".

    The week before I'm to leave for the vacation, I could be found running
around frantically trying to tie up loose ends and make sure everything was
in working order for my departure.  Fine!  Everything's all set!

    The day came and Steve and I drove off toward Chicago (Via Pittsburg
to visit Carnegie-Mellon Univ.).  At CMU, we picked up a new distribution
tape for the video editor "FINE" including all the latest changes.  Then
we continued on to Chicago to stay at Arleen's house.  We spent the day in
Chicago visiting museums and then headed west.

    Our trip took us through Iowa, Nebraska and into Colorado where our
next "real" stop was at the Digital Equipment Corp., Diagnostic Center in
Colorado Springs.  We stopped in, and Don McFadden was the only one around
(from the Washington area)!  It seemed that the other three guys were back
on the East Coast somewhere.  Anyway, they gave us a quick tour and we
were on our way again.

    A day and a half later we arrived in Tucson, whereupon (don't ask
me how to spell it...  where upon?)  Steve spent the remainder of the day
getting settled.  We walked around the campus, checked in at his office
to see how the summer help was faring with the computer, and (not last
and definately, not least), stopped in at the computer center to see
who was around and what was happenning there.  Within the first week or
so, I was able to "borrow" one of the accounts of one of their systems
staff and proceeded to make "FINE" (remember the editor I picked up
from CMU) work on their computer system.  Since I also had "my" copy of
"FINE" with all of "my" program changes, I was able to get the newer
version running in a day or so.  I took another week to "fine tune" the
editor to work a little more efficiently, and generally had fun meeting
people and wandering around on campus.

    The second week in Tucson, Steve finally setup his own terminal and
for the first time in three weeks, I spent a few hours checking up on
things back at work, and generally "hacking" on some of my own programs.

    Needless to say, some things happenned back at work while I was away,
and because I was not in attendence, I was not around to straighten them
out before they got out of hand.  One of the reasons for this vacation was
that I felt that the job was "getting to me".  A few weeks away, were
meant to "help" not "hinder".  I realized that I was fighting with just
about the entire operations staff to try and keep the systems software
organized and up to date (which, by the way, I felt, "was" my job).  I
also decided that I would begin looking for another job very soon and
even took in a few job interviews while in Tucson.

    Upon my return, three weeks later, I discovered that, indeed, some
awful things had happenned and rather than draw things out, possibly
have four or five people fired (possibly myself included) and only
"maybe", then, have the air cleared, I decided to quit, then and there.
The situation was not really that "clear cut" and because of the
responsibility of my position, it was decided that I would spend a few
weeks organizing and documenting the software "until" I decided about
quitting and taking another position (I hadn't told anyone yet about my
firm decision to "quit") or (until) the college decided to fire me.

    Almost the same day that I returned, I connected a computer terminal
to the ARPA-NET computer network and placed an "on-line" advertisment that
I was interested in working on such-and-such a computer, potentially one
on the ARPA-NET or using their facilities.

    I spent a few weeks wandering around, filling out forms, asking all
the different people I knew if their sections had any opennings.  (I knew
all the people in the systems programming sections in "all" of the PDP-10
computer sites where I'd be interested in working in Washington, so why
bother with personnel departments).  I checked with one agency that had
called me a few times, but mostly for "out of town" connections.

    The agency attempted to setup three major interviews for me.  A.M.S.,
On-Line Systems, and Tymshare.  I setup interviews with "anyone at ARPA",
N.I.H., Digital Equipment Corp., On-Line Systems and Baltimore County.
NIH wanted to hire me a month earlier while I was on vacation, now they
didn't have any people slots; DEC couldn't get anyone together to look
for a position unless I wanted to work in Massachusetts because each
group kept that information separate; and the local Tymshare Office
didn't need anyone of my calibre in Virginia, but California was looking
although they couldn't hire anyone but "local" people.

    So, I waited another week.  My ex-boss, who worked for On-Line
called me to setup an interview, the agency called me back to apologise
for trying to setup another one with them (which they got bawled out
for) at On-Line, the other person at the agency called me to tell me
that Tymshare was already trying to contact me before she sent them my
resume, I had my interview with A.M.S., and was still waiting to hear
back from Uncle Sam so I could seriously consider NIH.

    Another week goes by, and I get a call from Tymshare in California,
some ARPA-NET mail from SRI-International, Texas Instruments in Dallas,
and some postal mail from some company in Los Angeles.  For three or four
weeks the situation was ridiculously hectic!  I thought the entire
situation was hilarious.  All I had to do was decide where I wanted to
work and go there.

    It finally turned out that, Tymshare found out about me through the
"bulletin board" advertisement which I left on the ARPA-NET.  While they
were spinning their wheels trying to figure out the best way to contact
me, (they were using the telephone, and I was almost never home), they
also received a resume for me from the agency I had contacted in
Rockville.  Tymshare then flew me out to the west coast for an interview.
Thus, I spent all day interviewing there, and part of the next day at SRI
a few miles away.  Finally, it came down to a simple decision based upon
where I wanted most to work.  My top choices were:  NIH in Bethesda,
Maryland or Tymshare in Cupertino, California.

    The week begining November 3rd, I made my decision to go to California!
I handed in my resignation (officially) and called Tymshare to accept the
position, beginning the week of December 1st.  I then spent the next week
and one-half playing "expert" and telling anyone who wanted to know, (and
was suppossed to know), everything they wanted to know about the system and
didn't already know.  My last day at work was scheduled to be November 14th.

    On Thursday, November 13th, my car started acting up.  Great!  {Sigh!}
Anyway, this was terrible.  I didn't find this out until I was on my way
home late that night.  (And even then, I was tired & thought it might have
been my imagination.)  Ok, Friday morning, I was scheduled to stop at the
DEC offices (two miles from my house) to pick up some magnetic tapes.  Well,
my car barely made it there and back to my apartment.  I then spent another
two hours nursing my car back to health with water and anti-freeze.
Finally, when I was "sure" it was in running condition, I drove into work
(my last day)!

    I had no further trouble with my car, but decided that since I was to
take a long trip (4000 miles) that I'd have the car completely checked out.
I spent most of my "week off", waiting on my car to be fixed.  One of the
interesting events of this week was the piece of mail I received from the
U.S. Office of Personnel Management telling me that I now had a rating of
GS-12 and that I could have them add my name to any roster or position list
throughout the area. Nice!

    Well, back to my car...  I had new brakes put in, a new water pump (the
old one was leaking, and that's why I had the problem the previous day),
and new tires.  This took them 5 days to get everything straight.  It turned
out that, one of my rims was bent and depending upon which wheel they put
it on, the entire car shook at various stages of driving and braking.  When
that was solved, I finished helping the movers pack up my apartment and
begin the journey to California (via Connecticut).

    I, of course, stayed behind, because I was going to drive my newly
equipped car to California.  (hee hee!).  Sunday before Thanksgiving comes,
and I spend the day packing my car, and getting ready to leave.  Finally,
sometime after 7pm and before 8pm, I'm ready and I start my journey.  Well,
almost...  I had to drive by the DEC office and drop off those magnetic
tapes I borrowed on Friday.  I promised that I'd personally return them.  I
did!  Then, not less than 15 minutes passes, and it begins to rain.  YUK!
Anyway, the next day and one-half is covered with drizzling and light rain
with scatterred sunshine and dry spots.

    I mapped out my course and headed south through Virginia and North
Carolina.  The rain was too much on my eyes after spending all day packing,
so when I reached Greensboro, NC, I stopped for the night.  (Still raining)!
The first mishap was when I turned on the light switch and the lamp went
"fizzle".  Oh well, thinks I, it's too much trouble to change rooms just for
a light, since I just want to sleep anyway.  So I brought in my flashlight
and road atlas to check and make sure that I'm still on course.  Then, I
settled down and went to sleep.

    The next morning, I "packed up", had breakfast and started on my way.
Two hours later, somewhere in the middle of South Carolina, I went to open
my map to see how much further I had to travel before I reached Georgia,
and I realized that I left both my flashlight and my atlas in the motel
room.  There's no telling what else I may have left, but I think that is
all I was missing.

    I bought another atlas, and proceeded on my way.  The next major problem
I came across was the fact that the interstate highway that I was driving
on came to an abrupt halt.  (Well, not "that" abrupt that I didn't know it
was coming, but...  it didn't go all the way through to the next city).
I also noticed that my gas tank was nearing the "empty" state, and driving
on back roads at night (in Alabama) on empty was not very encouraging.
Anyway, I finally made it to civilization again and put 19 gallons and then
some into my 20 gallon tank.  That was less than 5 miles outside of Mobile.
Within an hour, I made my way to my destination in Biloxi, Mississippi.

    Jackie and her husband were waiting for me to arrive.  (Jackie had to
get up the next morning for work, so there wasn't much time for reunions
and such).  The next morning, I felt like a pamperred child.  Not only did I
not have to fend for my own breakfast on the road, but I practically had
Jackie's husband as my very own private chef.  That was an interesting
experience!  I stopped to see Jackie at work before I left, bought a new
flashlight (actually, I searched for three days for a special flashlight
like the one I lost, to replace the one that belonged on my bicycle.  After
not finding one, I had to settle for a hand-held model.), and finally
headed for Texas.

    That morning, I checked my radiator to make sure that my car was still
feeling fine.  It seemed to have lost about a quart of water, but I wasn't
too suprised considering that I just drove 1500 or so miles in slightly
more than a day.  The weather was nice in Mississippi near the coast, so I
became eager for a full day of travel.  I began to run low on "cash", (as
in: I only had about $2.30 left.), so I stopped in Baton Rouge, Louisiana
at the American Express office to pick up $100, which I expected to last
until I made it to California.  I continued west into Texas where I hit my
first sight of foul weather.

    As soon as I crossed into Texas, it began to sprinkle.  Twenty miles
further, it began to rain.  Another ten miles and all that I saw was heavy
rain.  Alas!  I had a schedule that I was determined to keep, so I continued
on into the twilight.  By the time I reached Houston, I noticed that my
temperature gague was off the scale.  With all the rain and road noise, I
hadn't noticed that my car was overheating.  The normal circulation process
was inhibited by the rain, and with the overheating problem just before
leaving Washington, my car was still influenced by that sort of thing.

    I was also having trouble seeing through my windshield, because my old
wiper blades weren't strong enough to withstand the torrential downpour
which I had just driven through.  I stopped at one of the service stations
to have the radiator checked and to buy wiper blades.  Well,  we added two
gallons of anti-freeze and another gallon of water to my radiator before the
car settled down to normal operating temperature.  They didn't have any
wiper blades which would fit my car (1969 mustang parts aren't all that
easy to find when they have some orignal parts left on them).  Anyway, I
figured that I had driven this far blindly, I'd drive on to San Antonio
just as blindly.

    I stopped to eat & then proceeded out of Houston.  That place was a
nightmare of roads, road construction, tall buildings and bright lights.
I'm sure it must be impressive during the day (without the rain).  Anyway,
just as my trip into Texas began, so it continued.  The rain became worse
and worse as I went further west.  I was really beginning to have trouble
finding the road.  Finally, a car with very bright tail lights passed me
and continued at a minimum speed of 60.  I got behind him (or her) and
simply followed it for the next hundred miles or so.  Eventually, the car
turned off and I had to proceed without my "lantern".

    I was really beginning to get tired.  Driving for long distances isn't
all that bad, but when you have to fight the weather every step of the way,
it both isn't much fun and takes lots of energy.  I almost fell asleep a
couple of times.  Then the weather changed again.  Instead of gale force
winds spraying water every which way, there was sleet, hail, and slush
everywhere.  I was suddenly "wide-awake"!  Eventually, the road became
covered with a few inches of snow, and I had to slow down to somewhere
between 40 and 50 to stay in my lane.  The last one hundred miles or so into
San Antonio was all snow.  Quiet snow!  If I weren't on a schedule, I would
have stopped for awhile just to watch it snow.

    Around one or two AM, I arrived and found a place to sleep for the
night.  I called Steve in Tucson, because that was my destination for
the next day, so that I'd be in Tucson for Thanksgiving, and I needed to
coordinate my arrival with his drinking and carousing schedule.  That
done, I had a nightcap and went to sleep.

    The next morning I checked out my car and replaced about 1 gallon of
water.  By this time, I knew that my car needed some looking after, but I
felt that it could wait until I made it to Tucson (one day of travel
away), and then I would be able to take it someplace reliable.

    As I left San Antonio, I looked for a place to stop and have someone
take a look at my car.  I was starting to get behind in my schedule, and
I really didn't want to take a lot of time.  Nothing looked convenient,
so I continued on my way.  This time however, I knew to keep a sharp eye
on my temperature gague.  At the slightest indication that the car was
running too hot, I was going to stop wherever I was at the very nearest
service center and have my car checked over.

    Well..., (there seems to always be that "well..."), less than 200
miles outside of San Antonio, when, after just topping a medium-steep
hill, I heard a tremendous noise come from under the car.  My firstion was to take my foot off the gas pedal and look at the temperature
gague.  The reading was still in the normal range, but as I watched, it
quickly went off the scale in less than a second.  I also notice that my
engine had quit.

    It was definately too hot, so I waited awhile for it to cool and tried
to turn my engine over.  (Unnhh.  It was heavy.)  It wouldn't start, no matter
what I did.  I pushed the car forward a few feet and examined the water and
oil and anti-freeze mixture on the road.  Well, there I was, smack dab in
the middle of Texas, 200 miles from the nearest "real" civilization with a
busted car.

    I got back into my car and called for some help on my "CB" radio.
After about an hour of that, with only one or two answers of "we'll
tell them at the next town", I openned my trunk and took out my big
red "HELP" sign and taped it across the back of my car.  About 15
minutes later, a huge tractor trailer stopped and the driver looked
over my car and asked about the trouble.  After a short discussion, he
offerred to drop me at the nearest town where I could get a tow-truck
to come out and get my car.

    I finally get to town, 35 miles away and find the tow-truck operator
at 4:30 PM (Wednesday, before Thanksgiving!).  We go out to pick up my car
and get back to town an hour later.  On the way into town, we passed a
couple in a stalled car (dead alternator), two girls in a wreck (they
spun 180 degrees, sheared off the front bumper on the hillside and dented
the rear fender) and another car with a dead battery, which we started
and he was on his way.  The cost for having my car towed into town?
Highway robbery!  $85 and in cash.  Nobody in the middle of Texas takes
anything but "green" money.  That left me with $15 from my $100 from Baton
Rouge.

    Well, the "one" service station in the town looked at my car briefly,
but said that they'd have to look at it the next day before they could
tell how much work was needed.  They tried starting the car & it was then
that it made it's one last grinding lurch.  The next day, their "help"
didn't come to work (Thanksgiving day, right?)  so, they said they'd get
to look at it "maybe" on Friday, probably not until Monday!!!!!

    So, what am I supposed to do?  Small town:  Two tow trucks, one
service station, fourteen "hunter's" motels, two "real" motels, two
diners, a Dairy Mart and a Dairy Queen.  I think there was also a bank,
a bus station (closed except when the bus comes by), and a sheriff's
office.  When the owner of the station said that Monday was the most
probable day before they'd know what was needed to fix my car, (and I
kinda knew that it would take at least 3 days to fix it, in this town
maybe 2 weeks!), I simply made up my mind that I wasn't going to stay
there with nothing to do.

    I found out what the bus schedule was, and I attempted to pack up most
of my belongings and make them ready to be put aboard the bus.  I neglected
to mention that my car was ""packed"".  I put all the things which weren't
in sturdy containers into the trunk and had the people at the service
station help me to get my assortment of boxes up to the bus station (1 and
1/2 long "Texas" blocks away).  [The worst is yet to come!]

    I waited an hour for the bus and it didn't show up.  {Great!} So, I
waited some more.  45 minutes later, the bus arrives, completely full,
or nearly so, and I run into the second major snag.  The sign on the bus
says "Greyhound", but it's run by the local company through southern
Texas, so, they only accept "cash"!  "But, I'm travelling to a regular
part of the Greyhound Lines, they'll accept something like my credit
card!"  "That's too bad!"  "But, we don't let you ride "our" section of
the line without payment!"

    Here I stand with 13 boxes and bags, quite willing to pay for it all,
wherever Greyhound will allow me to, and this little bus company telling
me that I "might" just jump off the bus without paying.  Anyway, the bus
waited & I went around to the motel I stayed at and one of the diners, to
see if I could get some "cash" from my credit card.  While I was doing this,
two women on the bus, seeing my plight, talked the bus driver into "just"
taking me into the next larger town, which might have something open, that
I could have "cash" sent to me by "wire".  The driver still didn't want
to do it, but on Thanksgiving Day, he relented.

    At the next town, "truck stop" actually, I stopped in the Western Union
office and tried to see what was involved in getting some cash wired on my
credit card.  Well, they didn't know it (else, they would have made me feel
a lot better at the time), but all I needed to do was to say, "Please wire
$$$$ to me, here, from here, using my very own credit card".  Then, in the
time it takes to call in a charge request, I would have had my money.  I
eventually had my sister, Karen, (might as well use names!)  send me the
money so I could pay for the ticket.  However, her money was never used for
that.  It arrived at the wrong place, and late!  (Nobody ever said that
Western Union was "fast" or sent things to the right place).  So, I had it
forwarded to Tucson, where I picked it up the following day.

    What happenned next was that we arrived at the end of the line, for the
small independent bus company.  But, we still weren't back to the regular
Greyhound Lines part of the route.  Yet another small independent bus company
did I have to deal with.  The driver took most, but unfortunately, "not all"
of my baggage off the bus.  The second driver waited, because we were trying
to solve my dilemma.  Eventually, he called his boss, and I talked his boss
into having the driver "hold" my credit card "for ransom" until we reached
El Paso, where the entire bill would be "paid" and both drivers would get
their "slips" of paper which said that they carried a passenger from point
"A" to point "B".  (From Sonora to Ft. Stockton & From there to El Paso).

    Then, my baggage (at least those 7 which were taken off the bus) were
labelled and reloaded on the bus.  Finally, I thought my ordeal was "over".
In El Paso, everything went smoothly, I paid for everything and was quite
"relieved" to be a "normal" passenger.  The rest of the trip into Tucson,
was un-eventful.  However, I had this "plant" which I had had since June or
July of 1979 with me.  Arizona has a quarantine station for all fruits, nuts,
plants and vegetables as you enter the state from the east or south.  So,
I covered my plant with a paper bag and was a little nervous until I got
the plant safely out of the Tucson bus terminal.  (Actually, it wouldn't
have made any difference, because healthy potted plants are exempt, and I
didn't know that.)

    In all of the hussle and bustle, I lost track of the number of bags
I had and what was where.  It seems that (as I mentioned above), not all
of my bags got marked properly.  I wrote my name and "TUCSON, AZ" in big
letters on all of the boxes, so all of those were recovered.  However,
"one" (I hope it was only one!) bag, neither had my name on it, nor was
it properly checked, and this bag (a boyscout knapsack) was lost.  Steve
has one just like it (perhaps a much newer one), so as we unpacked the
car after Steve came to pick me up, I noticed his & then remembered mine.

    Alas!  The bus left 10 minutes before I called the bus station.  They
tell me that they sent word down the line to look for that bag, but it has
been over 6 months now and now the first independent bus company wants me
to send them information regarding the lost bag.  They need my information
to determine who is liable for the bag.  "Them" (The Kerrville Bus Co.) for
not checking the baggage properly, or "Greyhound" for eventually losing
the bag which was improperly checked.  Frankly, I don't care which party is
responsible for the loss of my bag!  I just want my bag back!  In it (the 
bag), is one tape cassette recorder, one pair of roller skates, my gift
card collection (including slides from the Pompeii exhibit in London),
a notebook and more than 40 pairs of dark socks with about 15 pairs of
white socks.

    Anyway, on with my saga...  After some sleep, (I do get some every once
in a great while), Steve and I went to Western Union and picked up the money
that Karen had "wired" to me.  Steve and I spent the next couple of days
playing "Arizona tourist" with his parents, and we even spent an afternoon
in Mexico.  I even did a little shopping, and "found" a bicycle shop which
sold the flashlight for my bike to replace the "lost" one.

    All this "fun" while my car weighed heavy on my mind.  I made a few
telephone calls to Texas to check-up on the state of my car.  They didn't
even "look" at it until Wednesday!  A whole week!  Anyway, to make a long
story much longer, by the time Friday came and they told me that the repair
cost would be $1100 plus or minus $150, I was really frustrated and upset.
I wasn't any fun to be around because I was upset, but there didn't seem
to be anything that I could do, but wait... and wait... and wait.

    Friday afternoon, I decided that the situation was quickly becoming
insane.  With all my other problems, I just couldn't take much more of
this.  So, I made up my mind to definately "junk" the car.  I called
Tymshare to find out if they'd cover the costs of shipping from Texas,
and they said that anything "reasonable" they'd cover.

    So I called the car rental places and the airlines to make all the
reservations.  I had made up my mind to rent a car with "unlimited"
mileage for the weekend, (that was fun).  Steve and I drove that night and
the next day back to Texas and emptied out my car into the rented 1981
Mustang.  We really did "empty" my car, including taking the 4 "brand new"
radials (well, 2000 miles on them) the front and rear bumpers and other
miscellaneous parts.  (For example, I have a "piece" of the cam-shaft
which was supposed to have broken off while I was driving, even before I
left Washington!  It makes a nice souvenir "paperweight").  We left the car
sitting on cement "blocks".  All this, and the owner was not there to see
us (he went hunting, "for the weekend").

    We then proceeded to drive back to Tucson.  On the way back, we
decided to stop at each of the "bus" stations and check to see if
anyone had found my lost baggage.  Obviously, "No luck!"  The entire
drive, including the drive from the rental place to Steve's dorm room
twice, came to a grand total of 1,496 miles from late Friday (10pm)
night until Sunday evening (6pm).

    Then, we simply went to the airport and I bought my ticket for the
next day's flight at the super-discount rate.  The next day, Steve had
an exam, so I took all the baggage to the airport freight building by
myself, came back to pick up Steve and then he dropped me off "just"
in time to catch my flight to San Jose.

    Upon my arrival, I notified Tymshare and then found a small hotel
to stay in, until I could find an apartment.  I rented a car from Hertz
and picked up all my boxes and things from the airport the next day.
"Then" (I say this with enthusiasm), "THEN", I showed up at Tymshare
reporting for my "first" day at work (at 3:00 PM !!!).

    From the moment I realized I wasn't going to be in Tucson on
Thanksgiving Day, until I arrived in San Jose on Dec 8th, I was "really"
upset about what had happenned to my car.  It was like living inside a
"nightmare".  It took a week after I "finally" arrived, before I began to
really "settle" down.

    During that time, I began to try and "look" for an apartment.  I had
no idea where anything was, let alone "where" would be a "nice" place to
live.  I found out about looking things up in six different "yellow pages"
just to make one coherent list.  (This area is split into many little
towns and cities and each has its own set of telephone books!)  I spend a
day and one half just typing up a list of phone numbers and address for
apartments.  Then, it took another day of looking to find a map suitable
for using as a guide to the area.  {Whew!}

    Steve came up from Tucson a week or so later, and helped me to look
for a place.  On Christmas eve, at the last place we looked at, the
manager gave us the address of the place I finally moved into.  It is
a "townhouse": two-storey, 2 bedroom apartment.

    With that out of the way, I began to concentrate my efforts on finding
a suitable replacement for the "so called" automobile that I left in the
middle of Texas.  I was looking for a car that wasn't too small or large,
but would carry up to four people "comfortably" (at least for short hops),
but that I could also carry boxes or large sheets of paper, boxes, etc.,
whenever necessary.  The day before I was to "move in", I found one which
fit most of my expectations:  a blue Datsun 200SX Hatchback with lots of
nice features.  (Well, a large number anyway!).

    On the 14th of January, the moving company came and deposited hundreds
and thousands of boxes on my doorstep.  (Well, more than "one" hundred, but
less than "two" hundred, and they put them into whatever room that I so
designated).  But, almost everything was left in boxes!  I still have to
"un-pack" them!  That task is almost complete, "now"!, after five months in
the apartment.  It's not a fantastic place; I like my old apartment much
better; But it will have to do for now.


    "THAT" is the end of my story!!!    It is reasonably "complete",
					with much of the detail left
					out as I neared the end.

    3|