 6-Apr-84 14:21:08-PST,2988;000000000000
Date: Fri 6 Apr 84 14:21:07-PST
From: Mark Crispin <MRC@SU-SCORE.ARPA>
Subject: mailsystem changes for domains
To: TOPS-20@SU-SCORE.ARPA
cc: "*MRC:<MM.DOCUMENTATION>HOST-NAMING.TXT.1"@SU-SCORE.ARPA
Postal-Address: 725 Mariposa Ave. #103; Mountain View, CA 94041
Phone: (415) 497-1407 (Stanford); (415) 968-1052 (residence)

     I am presently beta-testing a set of changes to the TOPS-20
mailsystem for migrating to Internet domains.  The purpose of this
message is to outline the general strategy of these changes, not
all of which have been implemented yet.

     The special meaning of ".ARPA" at the end of host names has
been removed.  In its place is a new relative domain, ".#Internet".
Those of you who have non-Internet networks (e.g. Chaosnet) will
recognize this syntax.  Some of you may have seen this beastie
escape Score in outgoing mail while I was debugging; this should be
fixed now.

     To those of you unfamiliar to the concept of "relative domains",
this is a concept internal to the TOPS-20 mailsystem, and is used to
identify physical routing for sites which are on more than one
network in the small-i internet sense.  Sites which are only on one
kind of network can more or less ignore "relative domains".  The
reason for relative domains is that different kinds of networks have
different naming registries.  For example, there is a site, Mordor,
on Stanford's non-Internet LAN, different from the Internet host
which has MORDOR as one of its nicknames.  Mordor.#Pup (Stanford's
LAN is a 3MB Pup Ethernet) and MORDOR.#Internet are two different
entities recognized as such by TOPS-20 and available to the user via
this syntax.

     Soon, the means by which non-Internet TOPS-20 sites route to
Internet will change.  Instead of an ARPA entry in DOMAINS.TXT there
will be an Internet entry.  This is because Internet will be comprised
of other top-level domains other than ARPA, and hence the domain name
will no longer be optional.  This change will not affect Internet
TOPS-20 systems' DOMAINS.TXT usage.

     Because of the possibility of confusion arising between the
"pseudo-domains" used by DOMAINS.TXT and real domains as defined by
Internet, the syntax of pseudo-domains will probably change sometime
in the near future.  This will affect all sites, and will be announced
when it happens -- I need to think out the matter.

     The use of the term "domain" to refer to the TOPS-20 mailsystem's
concept of "pseudo" and "relative" "domains" has been unfortunate, as
it still confuses people who don't understand the difference between
these and real domains.  Hopefully the incompatible syntax differences
from real domains will make that more clear.  "Pseudo" and "relative"
domains are strictly local user interface entities, to work around the
absence of cooperation between different networks' naming registries.
They have nothing to do with real, NIC-registered domains.

-- Mark --
-------
